An Act to further amend the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (Act No.4
of 2017) to incorporate the amendments made to the CGST Act, 2017 to bring uniformity
in the application of COST and SGST Acts.
Be it enacted by the Legislature of Nagaland in the Seventy-second year of the
Republic of India as follows:
Short title and 1. (a) This Act may be called the Nagaland Goods and
commencement. Services Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2021. (Act No. 3 of 2021)
(b) It shall extend to the whole of Nagaland.
(c) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government
may, by notification appoint.
Amendment of 2. In the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (hereinafter
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with
effect from the 1st day of July 2017, namely:—
"(aa) the activities or transactions, by a person, other than an
individual, to its members or constituents or vice-versa, for cash,
deferred payment or other valuable consideration.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby
clarified that, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force or any judgment, decree or order of any
Court, tribunal or authority, the person and its members or
constituents shall be deemed to be two separate persons and the
supply of activities or transactions inter se shall be deemed to take
place from one such person to another;".
Amendment of
section (2), after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(aa) the details of the invoice or debit note referred to in clause
(a) has been furnished by the supplier in the statement of outward
supplies and such details have been communicated to the recipient
of such invoice or debit note in the manner specified under section
37;"

The Nagaland Gazette, Part -V 31, January, 2022
Amendment of
Amendment of
5. For section 44 of the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
'44. Every registered person. other than an Input Service
Distributor, a person paying tax under section 51 or section 52, a
casual taxable person and a non-resident taxable person shall
furnish an annual return which may include a self-certified
reconciliation statement, reconciling the value of supplies declared
in the return furnished for the financial year, with the audited
annual financial statement for every financial year electronically,
within such time and in such form and in such manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the Commissioner may, on the recommendations of
the Council, by notification, exempt any class of registered
persons from filing annual return under this section:
Provided further that nothing contained in this section shall apply
to any department of the Central Government or a State
Government or a local authority, whose books of account are
subject to audit by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
or an auditor appointed for auditing the accounts of local
authorities under any law for the time being in force.".
6. In section 50 of the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act, in
sub-section (1). for the proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with
effect from the i' day of July 2017, namely:—
"Provided that the interest on tax payable in respect of supplies
made during a tax period and declared in the return for the said
period furnished after the due date in accordance with the
provisions of section 39, except where such return is furnished
after commencement of any proceedings under section 73 or
portion of the tax which is paid by debiting the electronic cash
ledger.".
7. In Section 74 of the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act in
Explanation I, in clause (ii), for the words and figures 'Sections
122, 125, 129 & 130", the words and figures 'Sections 122 and
125" shall be substituted. Amendment of
Substitution of
New Section for

31, January, 2022 The Nagaland Gazette, Part-V 17
Amendment of
Amendment of
sub-section (12). the following Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:—
'Explanallon.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the
expression "self-assessed tax" shall include the tax payable in
respect of details of outward supplies furnished under section 37,
but not included in the return furnished under section 39.'
9. In section 83 of the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act, for
sub-section (1). the following sub-section shall be substituted
,namely:—
"(I) Where, after the initiation of any proceeding under
Chapter XII, Chapter XIV or Chapter XV, the Commissioner is of
the opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interest of the
Government revenue it is necessary so to do, he may, by order in
writing, attach provisionally, any property, including bank
account, belonging to the taxable person or any person specified in
sub-section (14) of section 122, in such manner as may be
prescribed.".
Amendment of
Amendment of
sub-section (6), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
'Provided that no appeal shall be filed against an order under subsection (3) of section 129, unless a sum equal to twenty-five per
cent, of the penalty has been paid by the appellant?'.
11. In section 129 of the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act,—
i. in sub-section (1), for clauses (a) and (b), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) on payment of penalty equal to two hundred per cent. of
the tax payable on such goods and, in case of exempted goods,
on payment of an amount equal to two per cent. of the value of
goods or twenty-five thousand rupees, whichever is less, where
the owner of the goods comes forward for payment of such
penalty;
(b) on payment of penalty equal to fifty per cent. of the value of
the goods or two hundred per cent. of the tax payable on such
goods, whichever is higher, and in case of exempted goods on
payment of an amount equal to five per cent. of the value of
goods or twenty-five thousand rupees, whichever is less, where
the owner of the goods does not come forward for payment of
such penalty;":

The Nagaland Gazette, Part-V 31, Januaiy, 2022
H. sub-section (2) shall be omitted;
iii. for sub-section (3), The following sob-section shall b
substituted, namely:—
"(3) The proper officer detaining or seizing goods or
conveyance shall issue a notice within seven days of such
detention or seizure, specifying the penalty payable, and
thereafter, pass an order within a period of seven days from the
date of service of such notice, for payment of penalty under
clause (a)or clause (b) of sub-section (1).";
iv. in sub-section (4), for the words "No tax, interest or penalty",
the words "No penalty" shall be substituted;
v. for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:-
Amendment of
of such goods fails to pay the amount of penalty under subsection (I) within fifteen days from the date of receipt of
the copy of the order passed under sub-section (3), the
goods or conveyance so detained or seized shall be liable
to be sold or disposed of otherwise, in such manner and
within such time as may be prescribed to recover the
penalty payable under sub-section (3):
Provided that the conveyance shall be released on payment
by the transporter of penalty under sub-section (3) or one lakh
rupees, whichever is less:
Provided further that where the detained or seized goods are
perishable or hazardous in nature or are likely to depreciate in
value with passage of time, the said period of fifteen days may
be reduced by the proper officer."
12. In section 130 of the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act, if". the word "Where" shall be
substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), in the second proviso, for the words,
brackets and figures "amount of penalty leviable under subsection ub section (1) of section 129", the words "penalty equal to
hundred per cent. of the tax payable on such goods" shall be
substituted;
(c) sub-section (3) shall be omitted

31, January, 2022 The Nagaland Gazette, Part-V 19
For section 151 of the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"151. The Commissioner or an officer authorized by him may, by
an order, direct any person to furnish information relating to any
matter dealt with in connection with this Act, within such time,
in such form, and in such manner, as may be specified therein.".
Amendment of 14. In section 152 of the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act,—
the words "of any individual return or part thereof' shall be
omitted;
(111 after the words "any proceedings under this Act", the words
"without giving an opportunity of being heard to the person
concerned" shall be inserted;
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
Amendment to 15. In Schedule 11 of the Nagaland Goods and Services Tax Act,
Schedule ii. paragraph 7 shall be omitted and shall be deemed to have been
omitted with effect from the 1 day of July 2017.
THE NAGALAND GOODS AND SERVICES TAX
(FIFTH AMENDMENT) Act, 2021 (Act No.3 of 2021)
This Bill was passed by the Nagaland Legislative Assembly on
26.11.2021.
I assent to this Bill
Sd/-
.JAGDISH i\1UK1,1I
GOVERNOR Substitution of 13.
New Section for
Power to call for
information.
Sd!-
Kohima, SHARINCAIN LONCKUMER
the 26.11.2021 SPEAKER
Nagaland Legislative Assembly