an act to replace the existing Principal Act 1973 and Amendment Act
and matters connected herewith.
An
Act
To enact in the Sixty Fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:
1. (i) This Actmay be called thaNagaland Board of School EducationAct,2014.
It shall replace theprincipalAct 1973 andhendrnent Act 1990.
n) It shall extend to the whole of the State ofNagaland.
i) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, By a
Notiiication appointment
Definitions
2. In this Act, unless there is anythmg repugnant to the subject or context:
(a) "Board" means theNagaland Board of School Education established under
theNagaland Board of School Education Act 2014;
(b) "Chairman" means the Chairman ofthe Board;
"College" means an institution affiliated to the Nagaland University or any
other recognized University by the University Grants Commission (UGC)
having itsjurisdiction in the State ofNagaland,
"School EducationDepartment" meam the Department of School Education
of the Government ofNagaland;
"Fund" means the Nagaland Board of School Education fund constituted
under this Act.
"High School"means an institution~gis&ered with the Board giving imlmction
in school education and preparing students for High School Leaving
Certificate Examination at the end of class 10;
"Higher Secondary School" means an institution giving instruction in school
education and preparing students for Higher Secondary School Leaving
Certificate Examination or Senior Secondary School Leaving Certificate
exami-nation at the end of class 12;
"Managing Committee" means a Managing Committee of a School;
"Notification"means anotilicationpublished by the Board,
''Primary Education" means education imparted in apnrnary or Junior Basic
SchooI or its equivalent;
"Professional andVocational School" means a school or institution impaaing
technical instruction upto the Diploma level;
"Recognised"means recognised by the Board, for the purpose of admission
to the privileges of the Board, or prior to recognition by the Board, by any
University established by law in Indiaor by any Board recognized by the
State Government;
"Regulation" means aregulation made by the Board under this Act;
''Rule" means a regulationmade by the State Government under this Act;
"School Education"means suchEducation asis designed to meet the needs
of the stage starting fiom the stage of Primary Education and precedes
immediately the stage of Degree Education controlled by any University
established by Law in India or by a Board constituted by Government for
this purpose and it includes vocational instruction upto the Diploma level:
"Secretary" means Secretary of the Board;
"State Government" or "Government" means the State Government of
Nagaland;
"University" meansthe University exercisingjurisdiction inNagdand.
"Institution" means a college with higher secondary section or a higher
secondary school or a high school registered wlth the Board;
(t) The word denoting masculine gender in these rules shall also represent1
connote the feminine gender and
(u) "Governing Body"meansthe apex body oftheBoard thatwill take decisions
for the Board;
Incorporation of the Board
3. (iJ The State Government shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of
theAct, establishby notifidon, aBoard to be knownastheNagaland Board
of School Education for regulation, supervision and development of school
education in accordance with the provision ofthis Act.
(i The Board shall, by the name oftheNagaland Board of School Education,
be abody corporatewith perpetual succession and common seal and shall
have the power to acquire and hold any property, to transfer any property
held by it, to enter into any contract and to do all other things necessary for
the purpose of carrying out its duties and functions and by the saidname sue
or be sued.
Constitution of the Governing Body of theBoard
4. (1) "There shall be a Governing Body ofthe Board, which shall consist ofthe
following members, namely:-
(a) Chairman.. . . . . .......... . . . . . . .Chairman of the Board.
(b) Ex-officio members.
(i) The Director of School Education, Nagaland.
(in The Director of Higher Education,Nagaland.
i The Director of State Council of Educational Research and Training,
Nagaland.
(iv) The Director of Youth Resources and Sports, Nagaland.
(v) The Director of Technical Education,Nagaland.
(vi) The Director of Employment and CraflsmenTraining, Nagaland
(W] Joint Labour Commissioner,Nagaland.
(2) The Secretary of the Board shall be the Member Secrekay ofthe Governing
Body of the Board.
(3) "Members ofthe Board shall not depute representatives to the meetings of
the Governing Body ofthe Board"
(4) The Administrative Head of the School Education Department shall be the
ControllingAuthority of the Board.
Publications of names of the Members of the Board Terms of Office of members
5. The names of persons nominated or co-opted members of the Governing
Body of the Board, shall be published by notification by the State Govenunent
6. The term of office members:-
(i) Nominated members shall hold office for a term of three years fiom the
date of the notification published under Section 5 and term of office of
co-opted members shall terminate on the same date as that of the
nominated members.
Provided that the State Government, may by notification, in the Official
Gazette, extend the term of the office of all such members by a period not
exceeding one year.
(ii) Notwithstanding the expiry of the term of three years specified in clauses
(i) the term of office of the out-going members shall be deemed to extend
to the date on which the names of the newly nominated members are
published under Section 5.
Disqualification/membership for.
7. (1) A person shall not be eligible for nomination or co-option as amember
of the Governing Body of the Board or the Committees formed by it. If
he;
(a) has been adjudged by a court of law to be or unsound mind;
(b) is an undischarged insolvent;
(c) has been convicted by a court of law for an offence which is declared by
the State Government to be an offence, involving moral turpitude, as
provided in the rules.
(2) if anorninated or co-optedmember of the Board or any Committee formed
by it becomes subject to any of the disquali6cation specified on &section
(1). his members hi^ shall thereu~on cease. , ,. A
(3) All disputes relating to the eligibility of any person for nomination or co-
option, shall be referred to the State Government whose decision on such
matter shall be final.
Resignation of members and casualvacancy
8. (1) A member of the Governing Body of the Board, other than an Ex-officio
member, may resign his seat by giving notice thereof in writing to the
Chairman, and such member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat
fiom the date of acceptance of his resignation by the Chairman. -
(2) The State Government may, by notification remove any nominated or co-
ovted members who remains absent fiom three consecutive meetings of
&e ~overnin~ ~od~ of the ~oardwithout the leave of the ~overnin~ Body
of the Board.
(3) In the event of a casual vacancy occurring by resignation, removal, death
or disqualification ofamember suchvacancy shall be filled by nomination
or co-option, as the case may be, in the manner provided in Section 4.
(4) Any personnominated or co-opted to fill a casual vacancy shall hold office
for the unexpired portion of the term of office of the member in whose place
he is nominated or co-opted.
Meetings of the Board
9. (i) Ordinary meetings:- The Governing Body of the Board shall meet not
less than thrice a year, but four months shall not intemene between two
successive meem. -
(3 Special meetings:- The Chairman or the Secretary may, at any time and shall
uDon the reauisitionmade bv not less than one-third of the members of the .
Governing Body of the Board other than the ex-officio members, and on a
date not more than twenty-one days of the receipt of such requisition, call a
special meeting ofthe Governing Body ofthe Board.
ii Seven days notice shall be given for ordinary meetings of the Governing
Body ofthe Board and two days notice for special meetings
(iv) "Sessional Chairman and Sessional Secretary":- In the absence of the
Chairman holding the charge ofthe Secretary or vice versa, the senior-most
Ex-officio member of the Governing Body shall act as Sessional Chairman
and the senior-most officer of the Board shall act as Sessional Secretary for
the meeting already notified.
Quorum Proceeding not invalidate by reason of vacancies.
10. (i) The quorum for every meeting of the Governing Body of the Board shall
one third of the members.
(ii) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (i) no act or proceeding of
the Governing Body of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of the
existence of any vacancy among the members of the Board.
Officers of the Board
11. (1) The following shall be the officers of the Board:
(i) Thechairman
(a) There shall be a 111-time Chairman who shall be appointed by the Gvemment
having held the post of Secretary for at least 5 (five) years;
@) In the event ofthe post of the Chairman becoming vacant due to any reason
and the Board having no eligible candidate, the Secretary of the Board shall
assume the charge ofthe Chainnan till such time the post is med. TheActing
Chairman shall chair the meetings and control the normal functioning of the
office.
(in The Secretary:
(a) There shall be a Secretary who shall be appointed by the Government
from the immediate junior cadre of the Board possessing aminimum of
ten years of administrative experience in the cadre equivalent to Class I
Gazetted and is recommended by the Governing Body of the Board.
Provided that, in the event ofthe Board having no eligible candidates for
the post of the Secretary, the Chairman who is serving full time, shall
assume the dual charge of the Chairman and Secretary till such time the
post is filled.
(2) The ~oard may appoint such other officers and employees as it necessary
for the eEcient discharge of its functionsunder this Act on such terms and -
conditions as may be determined by regulations
Powers and duties of the Board
12. Subject to any general or special order of the State Government, the provisions
of this Act, or any rules made thereunder, the Board shall have generally the
powers to regulate, supervise and control school education; and in particular
the powers and duties mentioned below:- (i) to prescribe course of instruction for Primary, upto Higher Secondary
andvocational School."
u) to conduct an supervise examinations based on such course or to cause
to conduct and supervise such examinations;
(iii) to admit to its examinations, on conditions that may be prescribed by
regulations, candidates who have pursued the prescribed courses of
instruction and also to take such disciplinary action against candidates as
may be prescribed by regulations;
(N) to demand and receive such fees as may be prescribed by regulation;
(v) to publish the result of its examinations; . ,
(vi) to demand and receive such fees as may be prescribed by regulation,
(vid to institute and award scholarships and prizes; . ,
(viii) to prepare, publish and select text books and supplementary books or to
cause to prepare, publish and select such books;
(ix) to lay down conditions of recognition of high schools, higher secondary
schools preparing candidates for high school course, higher secondary
course and other courses prescribed by the Board;
(x) to recognize High Schools and Secondary Schools andVocational schools
and to withdraw such recognition."
(xi) to take such disciplinary action as it thinks fit against institutions as
prescribed by regulations;
(xii) to identify problems in the field of school education and to take remedial
measures;
(xiii) to advise Government on physical, moral and social welfare of students in
recognised institutions and to prescribe conditions for their residence and
discipline;
(xiv) to prescribe necessary qualifications of teachers in recognised schools
(xv) to organize seminars and workshops for "in-service Teachers";
(mi) to receive m. from Government and donations from private individuals -
or associations for specific or gcneral purposes;
(xxii) to call for reports from the Director of School Education on the conditions
of recognised institutions or of institutions applying for recogni~ions;
(xviii) advise Government on re-organisation and development of school
education;
(xix) to advise Government relating to any matter within the provisions of this
Act on which the Government may consult the Board;
(xx) to appoint officers and other employees of the Board, and to prescribe
by regulation the terms and conditions of their service;
(mi) to in&tute by regulations for the benefit of its officers and other employees
such pension, gratuity and provident find as it may deem fit in such manner
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by regulations;
(xxii) to delegate any of its powers to any Committee constituted under this
Act; (d) to administer the Nagaiand Board of School Education Fund,
(xxiv) to receive, purchase and hold any property movable or immovable, whch
may become vested in it, and to dispose of all or any of the property,
movable or immovable belonging to it and also do all other acts incidental
or appertainingthereto; and
(xxv) to do all such acts and things as may be necessary to carry out the purpose
of this Act.
Powers of the State Government
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act:-
@ The State Government shall have the right to address the Board with
reference to anythmg conducted or done by the Board andto communicate
its views onany matter which the Boardis concerned.
(n) The Board shall report to the State Government such action, if any, as it
proposes to take or has talcenupon the communication of the Government.
(i) The State Government may, after consultation with the Board, issue such
directions consistent withthe provisions ofthis Act, as it may think fit, and
the Board shall comply with such directions.
(iv) The State Government may, by order in writing specifying the reasons
thereof, suspend the execution of any resolution or order of the Board,
and prohibit the doing of any act or-dered to be done by the Board, if the
State Government is of the opinion that such resolution, order or act is in
excess ofthe powers conferred upon the Board by or under this Act.
(v) The State Government may, after consultation with the Board, suspend or
remove a member whose continuance as a member of the Board is
considered to be detrimental to the interest of the Board.
(i) The State Government shall fund the Board by way of Grant-in-Aid to
meet the financial requirement ofthe Nagaland Board of School Education
through the yearly budget.
Constitution of School Education Board Fund.
14. A fund to be called the Nagaland Board of School Education Fund shall be
constituted and all sums received by or on behalf of the Board under this Act
shall be placed to the credit thereof.
Custody and investment of the School Education Board Fund
15. All money at the credit ofthe Fund shall be kept in the Government Treasury or
any Scheduled Bank, as the Board may determine.
A~plications of the Fund - -
16. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Fund shall be applicable only to the
payment of the charges and expenses incidental tomatters specified in this Act.
Audit of the Accounts of theBoard
17. The accounts of the Board shall be audited only by such agency as may be
specified by the State Govenunent and a copy of the audited accounts shall be
submitted by the Board to the State Government by such date each year as the
State Government may specify.
Power and duties of Chairman
18. (1) It shall be the duty of the Chairman as the Chief Executive Officer to see
that the provisions ofthis Act and the regulations made under it are faiWy
observed, and the decision of the Board are duly implemented and he
shall have all powers necessary for the purpose.
(2) The Chairman shall have powers to convene meetings ofthe Board.
(3) When any emergency arising out of administrative business of the Board
requires, in the opinion of the Chairman, that immediate action should be
taken, the Chairman shall take such action as he deems necessary and
report his action to the Board at its next meeting.
(4) The Chairman shall exercise such other powers as may be prescribed by
the regdakions.
Powers and Duties of the Secretary
19. The Secretary ofthe Board shall be the principal administrative officer, and shall,
subject to the control of the Chairman, perform such duties as may be prescribed
by regulations.
Powers and duties of the other officers
20. Other officers will have such powers and duties as may be prescribed by
~gulations.
Committees of the Board
21. (1) The Board shall, for the purpose of carrying out its duties and functions
imposed under this Act appoint the following committees, namely;-
($ Curriculum and Syllabus Committee,
Eamnatl . . on Committee,
(ii Recognition Committee, . . (iv) Admms!dve Committee,
(v) Finance Committee,
(ti) Professional and Vocational Education Committee
(vii) Such other committees as may be found necessary.
(2) Every such committee shall consist of such members of the Board and of
such other persons as the Board may appoint.
(3) Every such committee except the Examination Committee may co-opt
persons to be members to the extent of one-third ofthe members appointed
to it.
(4) Members of such committees shall hold office for such time as the Board
may determine.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder the
duties and functionof the committees shall be determined by regulations.
Exercise of powers delegated by the Board to Committee.
22. All matters relating to exercise of powers conferred upon the Board by this Act
which are by regulations delegated to any committee appointed under Section21
shall stand referred to that committee and the Board before exercising such powers
shall receive and consider the report or recommendation of the committee with
respect to the matter in question.
Power of the Board to make regulation
23. (1) TheBoardmaymakeregulationsforthepurposeofcanyingoutthepmvisions
ofthis Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoingpowers,
the Board may make regulations providing for all or any of the following
matters, namely:-
(a) the constitution, powers and duties of committees appointed under Section
21;
(b) courses of study to be laid down for different examinations;
(c) marks required for passing in any subject and the examination as a whole
and for credit and distinction in any subject;
(d) qualifications, appointment and remuneration of examiners, paper setters
and others;
(e) conduction examinations and publishing the results;
(0 conditions of recognition of schools;
(g) conditions under which candidates shall be admitted to the examinatinn of
the Board;
(h) disciplinary measures for malpractices in examktions; (i) fhng of fees and charges in respect of examinations;
6) providing fund forthe benefit of the employees of the Board;
O rate of travelling and daily allowances to the non-official members of the
Board or committee; (l) delegation ofpowers or assignment of hctions to committees formed under
this Act, and
(m) allmattes which, by this Act, are to be or may be provided fortheregulations:
Provided that all regulations, alterations and revocation thereof shall be
subject to approval by the State Government and shall be published through
GovernmentNoti6cation.
Board to furnish reports, returns, to the State Govt.
24. The Board shall furnish to the State Government such reports, returns and
statements and such other information relating to any matter under the
control of the Board as the State Government may require.
Power of State Govt. to reconstitute the Board
25. If, in the opinion of the State Governmenf the Board has shown its incompetence
to perform, or persistently made default in the performance the duties imposed
or exceeded or abuse the powers conferred upon it by or under this Act, the
State Government shall formulate in writing specsc charges against the Board in
respect of those matters and shall forward a copy of such charges to the Board in
respect of those matters and shall fomd a copy of such charges to the Board
with dictions to submit any comments or explanations in respect thereof to the
State Government within such period as may be specified in this behaK After the
wnsidemtion of the comments and explanations of the Board, the State Government
may, if it thinks fit, by notillcation supersede the Board and thereafter reconstitute
the Board in accordance with the provisions of Section 4, and in every such case,
the State Government shall, as soon as may be, lay before the State Legislature a
copy of the said notification, together with the statement of the reasons which led
to suchreconstitutions.
Vesting ofpowers till the constitution of the Board
26. Until the Board is reconstituted after supersession under section 25, the duties
and powers of the Board shall be performed and exercised by, and the
property of the Board shall vest in such person or authority as the State
Government may specify by notification
Powers of State Govt. to make rules.
(1) The State Government may make rules for canying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) All rules made under this Section shall be laid in the Nagaland Legislative
Assembly as soon as possible after they are made and shall be subject to
suchmodiiication as the Legislative Assembly may make duringthe session
in which they are so laid or the session immediately following.