An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to
Forest, Produce, and the Duty liviable on timber
in Nagaland.
Preamble. – WHEREAS it is expedient to amend and consolidate the law relating to
forest, produce, and the duty leviable on timber in Nagaland;
It is hereby enacted in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

Title, extent and commencement. – 1. (1) This Act may be called the Nagaland
Forest Act, 1968.
(2) It extends to the whole of Nagaland; Provided that the State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any place from the operation of the whole or any
part thereof, and withdraw such exemption.
(3) It shall come into force on such day as the State Government by notification in the
Official Gazette directs.
(4) A notification under the proviso to sub-section (2) exempting a place from the
operation of the whole or any part of the Act shall not affect anything done, or any offence
committed, or any fine or penalty imposed in such place before such exemption.

Definitions. – 2. In this Act, and in all rules made thereunder, unless there is
something repugnant in the subject or context: -
(1) “cattle” includes also elephants, buffaloes, horses, mares, geldings, ponies,
colts, fillies, mules, asses, pigs, mithuns, sheeps, [rams, ewes]1 lambs, goats, and kids;
(2) “Forest offence” means an offence punishable under this Act or any rule
thereunder;
(3) “Forest officer” means any person appointed by name or as holding an office
by or under the orders of the State Government to be a Conservator or Director or Director of
Forest, Deputy Conservator, Assistant Conservator, Forest Ranger, Deputy Ranger, Forester
or Forest Guard, or to discharge any function of Forest Officer under this Act or any rule
thereunder;
(4) “Forest produce” includes: -
(a) the following, whether found in, or brought from a forest or not, that is to say, -
timber, charcoal caoutchoue, catechu, wood oil, resin, natural varnish, bark, lac,
myrabolams, rhinoceros horns, and
(b) the following when found in, or brought from a forest, that is to say: -
(i) trees and leave, [flowers]2 and fruits and all other parts or produce not
hereinbefore mentioned of trees,
(ii) plants not being trees (including grass, creepers, reeds and moss), and all
parts of produce of such plants,
(iii) wild animals, birds, butterflies, insects and skins, tusks and [horns (other
than rhinoceros horns), bones, silk cocoons]3 honey and wax and all other
parts of produce of animals, and
(iv) peat, surface soil, rock and minerals (including limestone, laterite, mineral
oils and all produces of mines or quarries);
(5) “Government” means the Government of Nagaland;
(6) “Land at the disposal of the Government” means land in respect of which no
person has acquired –

1. Added vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.
2. Added vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.
3. Substituted vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.

(a) a permanent, inheritable and transferable right of use and occupancy under any
law for the time being in force; or
(b) any right created by grant or lease made or continued by, or on behalf of, the
Government not being land vested in the Government for the purposes of the
Central Government;
(7) “Magistrate” means a Magistrate of the first or second class, and includes a
Magistrate of the third class when he is specially empowered by the State Government to try
forest offences;
[(7A) “Prescribed” means prescribed by any rule made under this Act]1
(8) “River” includes also streams, canals, creeks and other channels, natural or
artificial;
(9) “tree” includes palms, bamboos, stumps, brushwood and canes; and
(10) “timber “ includes trees when they have fallen or have been felled, and all
wood, whether cut up or fashioned or hollowed out for any purpose or not.

CHAPTER II
RESERVED FORESTS

Power to constitute reserved forests. 3. The State Government may continue any
land at the disposal of the Government as a reserved forest in manner hereinafter provided.
Notification by State Government of proposal to constitute a reserved forest. - 4.
(1) Whether it is proposed to constitute any land into reserved forest, the State Government
shall publish a notification in the Official Gazette –
(a) specifying a s nearly as possible the situation and limits of such land;
(b) declaring that it is proposed to constitute such land as a reserved forest; and
(c) appointing an officer (hereinafter called the Forest Settlement Officer) to inquire
into determine the existence, nature, and extent of any rights claimed by, or
alleged to exist in favour of, any person in or over land comprised within such
limits, and claims relating to the practice within such limit of jhum cultivation,
and to deal with the same as provided in this Chapter.
1. Added vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.
(2) The Forest Settlement Officer shall ordinarily be a person other than a Forest
Officer, but a Forest Officer may be appointed by the State Government to assist the Forest
Settlement Officer in the inquiry prescribed by this Chapter.
Proclamation by Forest Settlement Officer.- 5. When a notification has been
published under section 4, the Forest Settlement Officer shall publish in [any prescribed
language or languages]1 at the headquarters of each district and sub-division in which any
portion of the land comprised in each notification is situated, and in every town and village in
the neighbour-hood of such land a proclamation –
(a) specifying as nearly possible the situation and limits of the proposed forests;
(b) setting forth the substance of the provision of the next following section;
(c) explaining the consequences which, as hereinafter provided, will ensue on the
reservation of such forest; and
(d) fixing a period of not less than three months from the date of the publication of
such proclamation, and requiring every person claiming any right or making any
claim referred to or mentioned in section 4 either to present to such officer within
such period a written notice specifying, or to appear before him within such period
and state, the nature of such right of claim.
Bar of accrual of forest rights after proclamation.- 6. (1) During the interval
between the publication of such proclamation and the date fixed by the notification declaring
the forest to be reserved as hereinafter provided, no right shall be acquired in or over the land
comprised in such notification, except by succession or under a grant or contract in writing
made or entered into by, or on behalf of, the Government or some person in whom such right
or power to create such right was vested when the proclamation was published; and on such
land no new house shall be built or plantation formed, no fresh clearings for cultivation or for
any other purpose shall be made, and no trees shall be cut for the purpose of trade or
manufacture except as hereinafter provided.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any act done with the
permission in writing of the Forest Settlement Officer, or any clearings lawfully made

1. Substituted vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.
for jhum cultivation by persons in the habit of practicing such cultivation on such land.

Inquiry by Forest Settlement Officer. – 7. (1) The Forest Settlement Officer shall
take down in writing all statements made under section 5, and shall inquire into all claims
made under that section, and the existence of any right or practice mentioned in section 4 in
respect of which no claim is made.
(2) The Forest Settlement Officer shall at the same time consider and record any
objection which the Forest Officer, if any, appointed under section 4 to assist him, may make
any such claim or with respect to the existence of any such right or practice.
Powers of Forest Settlement Officer. – 8. For the purposes of such inquiry the
Forest Settlement Officer may exercise –
(a) power to enter, by himself or any officer authorized by him for the purpose, upon
any land, and to survey, demarcate, and make a map of the same; and
(b) the powers of a Civil Court in the trial of suits.
Treatment of claims relating to practice of jhum cultivation.- 9. (1) In the case of
a claim relating to the practice of jhum cultivation the Forest Settlement Officer shall record a
statement setting forth the particular of the claim and of any local rule or order under which
the practice is allowed or regulated, and submit the statement to the State Government,
together with his opinion as to whether the practice should be permitted or prohibited wholly
or in part.
(2) On receipt of the statement and opinion the State Government may make an order
permitting or prohibiting the practice wholly or in part.
(3) If such practice is permitted wholly or in part the Forest Settlement Officer may
arrange for its exercise –
(a) by altering the limits of the land under settlement so as to exclude land of
sufficient extent of a suitable kind, and in a locality, reasonably convenient for the
purpose of the claimants, or
(b) by causing certain portions of the land under settlement to be separately
demarcated, and giving permission to the claimants to practice jhum cultivation
therein under such conditions as he may prescribe.
All arrangements made under this sub-section shall be subject to the previous sanction
of the State Government.
(4) The practice of jhum cultivation shall in all cases be deemed to be a privilege
subject to control, restriction, and abolition by the State Government, and not to be a right.
Power to acquire land over which right is claimed.- 10. (1) In the case of a claim to
a right in or over any land other than the following rights, namely: -
(a) a right to a watercourse or to use of water,
(b) a right of pasture or to forest produce, the Forest Settlement Officer shall pass an
order specifying the particulars of such claim and admitting or rejecting the same
wholly or in part.
(2) If such claim is admitted wholly or in part, the Forest Settlement Officer may: -
(a) come to an agreement with the claimant for the surrender of the right, or
(b) exclude the land from the limits of the proposed forest, or
(c) proceed to acquire such land in the manner provided by the Land Acquisition Act,
(1 of 1894) or the Nagaland Land (Requisition and Acquisition) Act, 1965 ( 3
of 1965).
(3) For the purpose of so acquiring such land –
(i) the Forest Settlement Officer shall be deemed to be a Collector proceeding under
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 ( 1 of 1894) and Nagaland Land (Acquisition and
Requisition) Act, of 1965 ( 3 of 1965).
(ii) the claimant shall be deemed to be a person interested and appearing before him in
pursuance of a notice given under section 7 of the Nagaland Land (Acquisition
and Requisition) Act, 1965 ( 3 of 1965 ),
(i) the provisions of the proceeding sections of that Act shall be deemed to have been
complied with, and
(ii) the Collector, with the consent of the claimant may award compensation in land,
or money, or partly in land and partly in money.
Order on claims to right-of-way, watercourse or pasture, or forest produce.- 11.
(1) In the case of a claim to a right of a kind specified in clause (a), (b) or clause (c) of
particulars of such claim and admitting or rejecting the same wholly or in part.
(2) When a claim to any such right is admitted, if the right is for the beneficial
enjoyment of any land or building, the Forest Settlement Officer shall record the designation,
position, and area of such land or the designation and position of such building.
(3) Where the right is a right to forest produce, the Forest Settlement Officer shall
record whether the forest produce obtained by the exercise of such right may be leased, sold,
or bartered, and such other particulars as may be necessary in order to define the existence,
nature, and extent of the right.
Provision for right of pasture or to forest produce admitted.- 12. (1) When the
Forest Settlement Officer has admitted wholly or in part and recorded under the last
foregoing section a claim to a right of pasture or to forest produce, he shall be as far possible
provide for the exercise of such right:
(a) by altering the limits of the proposed reserved forest so as to exclude land of
sufficient extent of a suitable kind, and in a locality reasonably convenient for the
purpose of the claimant, or
(b) by recording an order continuing to the claimant a right of pasture or to forest
produce, as the case may be, subject to such rules as may be prescribed by the
State Government.
(2) An order passed under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall record, as far as
practicable,
(i) where the right of pasture, the number and description of the cattle which the
claimant is from time to time entitled to graze and the local limits within which,
and the seasons during which such pasture is permitted, and
(ii) where the right is the right to forest produce, the quantity of such produce, which
the claimant is authorized to take or receive and the local limits within which, the
season during which and the mode in which, the taking or receiving of such
produce is permitted, and
(iii) whether the right is a right to forest produce such other particulars as may be
required in order to define the extent of the right which is continued, the mode in
which it may be exercised, and the extent to which the benefit thereof may be
leased, sold, or bartered.

Commutations of such right.- 13. Whenever any right of pasture or to forest produce
admitted under section 11 is not provided for in one of the ways prescribed in section 12, the
Forest Settlement Officer shall, subject to such rules as the State Government may prescribe
in this behalf commute such right by paying a sum of money in lieu thereof or, with the
consent of the claimant, * * * *1 by the grant of land or in such other manner as such officer
thinks fit.
Appeal from order passed under foregoing sections.- 14. Any person who has
made a claim under the Chapter or any Forest Officer or other person generally or specially
empowered by the State Government in this behalf may, within three months from the date of
any order passed on such claim by the Forest Settlement Officer under sections 10, 11, 12 and
present an appeal from such order to such officer of the Revenue Department, of rank not
lower than that of a Deputy Commissioner, as the State Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint by name, or as holding an office, to hear appeals from such
orders.
Appeal under the last foregoing section.- 15. (1) Every appeal under the last
foregoing section shall be made by petition in writing and may be delivered to the Forest
Settlement Office, who shall forward it without delay to the officer competent to hear the
same.
(2) Every such appeal shall be heard in the manner prescribed for the time being for
the hearing of appeals in matters relating to revenue and, except as hereinafter provided, the
order passed on appeal shall be final.
Notification declaring forest reserve.- 16. (1) When the following events have
occurred, namely: -
(a) the period fixed under section 5 for preferring claims has elapsed, and all claims,
if any, made within such period have been disposed of by the Forest Settlement
Officer, and
(b) if such claims have been made, the period fixed by section 14 for appealing from
the orders passed on such claims has elapsed, and all appeals, if any, presented
within such period have been disposed of by the Appellate Officer, and

1. The words “by the grant of the claimant” deleted vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.

(c) all lands, if any, to be included in the proposed reserved forest which the Forest
Settlement Officer has, under section 10, elected to acquire under the Land
Acquisition Act, 1984 or the Nagaland Land (Acquisition and Requisition) Act,
1965, [have become vested in the Government under any of those Acts]1 the Sate
Government may publish a notification in the Official Gazette, specifying the
limits of the forest which it is intended to reserve and declaring the same to be
reserved from a date fixed by such notification.
(2) From the date so fixed such forest shall be deemed to be a reserved forest.
Extinction of rights not claimed.- 17. Rights in respect of which no claim has been
preferred under section 5 and of the existence of which no knowledge has been acquired by
inquiry under section 7 shall thereupon be extinguished, unless, before the publication of
such notification, the person claiming them has satisfied the Forest Settlement Officer that he
had sufficient cause for not preferring such claim within the period fixed under section 5.
Publication of translation of such notification in neighbourhood of forest. – 18.
The Deputy Commissioner of the district in which the forest is situated shall, before the date
fixed by such notification, cause a translation thereof in the [any prescribed language or
languages]1 to be published in the manner prescribed for the proclamation under section 5.
Power to revise arrangement made under section 12 or 15.- 19. The State
Government may, within five years from the publication of any notification under section 16,
revise any arrangement made under section 12 or 15 and may rescind or modify any order
made under this Chapter, and direct that any one of the proceedings specified in section 12
[be taken in lieu of any other such proceedings]2, or that a right admitted under section 11 be
commuted in the manner mentioned in section 13.
Acquisition of rights over reserved forest.- 20. No right of any description shall be
acquired in or over a reserved forest, except by succession or under grant or contract in
writing made by, or with the previous sanction of, the State Government, or some person in
whom such right, or the power to create such right, was vested when the notification under

1. Substituted vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.
2. Substituted vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.
Alienation of rights in reserved forest.- 21. (1) Notwithstanding anything herein
contained, no right continued under section 12 shall be alienated by way of grant, sale, lease,
mortgage, or otherwise without the previous sanction of the State Government:
Provided that, when any such right is continued for the beneficial enjoyment of any
land or building, it may be sold or otherwise alienated with such land or building without
such sanction.
(2) The benefit of any right continued under section 12 shall not be leased, sold or
bartered except to the extent defined by the order recorded under that section.
Power to stop ways and watercourses in reserved forest.- 22. Any Forest Officer
may, from time to time, with the previous sanction of the State Government or of a Forest
Officer or other officer authorized by the State Government in this behalf, stop any public or
private way or watercourse in a reserved forest:
Provided that for the way or watercourse so stopped another way or watercourse
which, in the opinion of the State Government, is equally convenient, already exists or has
been provided or constructed by the Forest Officer stopping the way or watercourse.
Penalties for trespass or damage in reserved forests.- 23. Any person who in a
reserved forest –
(a) trespass, or pastures cattle, or permits cattle to trespass, or
(b) causes any damage by negligence in felling any tree or cutting or dragging any
timber, shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or, when the
damage resulting from his offence amounts to more than twenty five rupees to
double the amount of such damage.
Acts prohibited in such forest. – 24. Any person who –
(a) makes any fresh clearing prohibited by section 6, or
(b) sets fire to a reserved forest, or in contravention of any rules made by the State
Government, kindles any fire, or leaves any fire burning, in such manner as to
endanger such a forest, or who in any such forest,
(c) kindles, keeps or carries any fire except at such seasons and in such manner as a
Forest Officer specially empowered in this behalf may from time to time notify, or
(d) fells, cuts, girdles, marks, lops, taps, or injures by fire or otherwise any tree, or
(e) quarries stone, burns lime or charcoal, or collects subject to any manufacturing
process or removes any forest produce, or
(f) clears or breaks up any land for cultivation or for any other purpose, or
(g) poisons water or in contravention of any rules made by the State Government,
hunts, shoots, fishes, or sets traps or snares shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with the fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees, or with both.
Acts excepted from sections 23 and 24.- 25. Nothing in section 23 or section 24
shall be deemed to prohibit –
(a) any practice of jhum cultivation permitted under section 9, or
(b) the exercise, in accordance with the rules if any, made by the State Government
under section 12 of any right continued under that section, or
(c) the exercise of any right created by grant or contract in the manner described in
(d) any act done with the permission in writing of a Forest Officer specially
empowered to grant such permission.
Penalty for offences committed by persons having rights in reserved forest.- 26.
Whenever fire is caused willfully or by gross negligence in a reserved forest by any person
having rights in such forest or permission to practice jhum cultivation therein, or by any
person, in his employment, or whenever any person having rights in such forest contravenes
the provisions of section 21, the State Government may, notwithstanding the infliction of any
punishment under this Act, direct that in such forest, or any specified portion thereof the
exercise of all or any of the rights of pasture or to forest produce shall be extinguished, or for
such period as it thinks fit be suspended and, with respect to the practice of jhum cultivation,
may take such action under section 90, sub-section (4) as may seem to be proper.
(2) From the date so fixed such forest or portion shall cease to be reserved, but the
rights, if any, which have been extinguished therein shall not revive in consequence of such
cessation.

CHAPTER III
Village Forests
Constitution of village forest.- 28. (1) The State Government, may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, constitute any land at the disposal of the Government a village forest for
the benefit of any village community or group of village communities, and may in like
manner vary or cancel any such notification.
(2) Every such notification shall specify the limits of such village forest.
Powers to make rules for village forest.- 29. (1) The State Government may make
rules for regulating the management of village forest, prescribing the conditions under which
the community or group of communities, for the benefit of which any such forest is
constituted may be provided with forest produce or with pasture, and their duties in respect of
the protection and improvement of such forest.
(2) The State Government may by such rules declare any of the provisions of Chapter
II of this Act to be applicable to village forest.
Inquiry into and settlement of rights.- 30. All claims to any rights other than the
rights of the village community or group of village communities of for the benefit of which
such village forest is constituted, shall be inquired into, recorded, and provided for in the
manner prescribed by Chapter II of this Act.

CHAPTER IV
General Protection of Forests and Forest Produce

Reserved trees in unsettled tracts.- 31. The State Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette,-
(a) declare that any trees or any specified class of trees standing on any land at the
disposal of the Government shall, from a date to be fixed by such notification, be
reserved trees;
(b) vary or cancel any such notification.
Protection of reserved trees.- 32. No person shall fell, cut, girdle, mark, lop, tap, or
injure by fire or otherwise any reserved trees, except in accordance with rules made by the
State Government in this behalf, or as provided by the last section of this Chapter.
Protection of unsettled forest belonging to the Government.- 33. (1) No person
shall make use of any forest produce of any land at the disposal of the Government and not
included in a reserved forest or village forest, except in accordance with rules to be made by
the State Government in this behalf, or as provided by the last section of this Chapter.
(2) Such rules may, with respect to such land: -
(a) regulate or prohibit the cutting of jhums or the issue of grants or leases on behalf
of the Government;
(b) regulate or prohibit the kindling or fires, and prescribe the precautions to be taken
to prevent the spreading of fires;
(c) regulate or prohibit the felling, cutting, girdling, marking, lopping, tapping, or
injuring by fire or otherwise of any trees, the sawing, conversion , and removal of
timber, and the collection and removal of other forest produce;
(d) regulate or prohibit the quarrying of stone, the boiling of catechu, of the burning
of lime or charcoal;
(e) regulate or prohibit the cutting of grass and pasturing of cattle, and regulate the
payments, if any, to be made for such cutting or pasturing;
(f) prohibit the poisoning of water and regulate or prohibit hunting, shooting and
fishing, and the setting of traps or snares;
(g) regulate the sale of free grant of forest produce; and
(h) prescribe or authorize any Forest Officer to prescribe, subject to the control of the
State Government, the fees, royalties, or other payments for forest produce, and
the manner in which such fees, royalties, or other payment are to be levied,
whether in transit, or partly in transit, or otherwise.
(3) The State Government may exempt any person or class of persons, or any local
area, from the operation of any such rule, and may cancel such exemption.
Penalties.- 34.(1) If any person infringes the provisions of section 32, he shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
(2) The State Government may, by a rule under section 33, attach to the breach of any
rule under that section any punishment not exceeding that mentioned in sub-section (1).
Nothing in this Chapter to prohibit acts done in certain case.- 35. Nothing in this
Chapter, or in any rule under this Chapter, shall be deemed to prohibit any act done in the
exercise of any right or with the permission in writing of a Forest Officer specially
empowered to grant such permission.

CHAPTER V
Control over Forest and Waste Land not being the property of
Government.

Protection of Forests for special purposes.- 36. (1) The State Government may, by
notification in the local Official Gazette, regulate or prohibit in any forest or waste-land-
(a) the breaking up or clearing of land;
(b) the pasturing of cattle; or
(c) the firing, clearing or the vegetation; when such regulation or prohibition appears
necessary in the public interest for any of the following purposes: -
(i) for protection against storms, winds, rolling stones, floods and avalanches;
(ii) for the preservation of the soil on the ridges and slopes and in the valleys
of hilly tracts, the prevention of land slips or of the formation of ravines and
torrents or the protection of land against erosion, or the deposit thereon of
sand, stones or gravel;
(iii) For the maintenance of water-supply in springs, rivers and tanks;
(iv) for the protection of public roads, public bridges, railways, and other lines of
communication;
(v) for the preservation of the public health.
(2) The State Government may, for any such purposes, construct at its own expense,
in or upon any forest of waste land, such work as it thinks fit.
(3) No notification shall be made under sub-section (1) nor shall any work be begun
under sub-section (2), until after the issue of a notice to the owner of such forest or land
calling on him to show cause within a reasonable period to be specified in such notice, why
such notification should not be made or work constructed, as the case may be, and until his
objections, if any, and evidence he may produce in support of the same, have been heard by
an officer not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner duly appointed in that behalf.
(4) All objections filed under the preceding sub-section, together with the proceeding
the Special Officer relating thereto, shall be referred to the State Government for orders. On
receipt of such reference and after hearing such further cause as the objector may have to
show, the State Government shall pass such orders as it thinks fit.
In any case in which an order under sub-section (1) or action under sub-section (2) is,
in the opinion of the State Government, likely to disturb substantially the owner’s rights in
the land to which such order or action relates, the State Government may award to such
owner such compensation as it may deem equitable.
Provided that any compensation so paid shall be paid deducted from the amount
payable to the owner under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, in the event of
action being taken under the provisions of section 38.
Power to assume management of forest.- 37. (1) In case of neglect of or willful
disobedience to, any regulation or prohibitions under section 36, or if the purposes of any
work to be constructed under that section so require, the State Government may, after notice
in writing to the owner of such forest or land and after considering his objections, if any,
place the same under control and management of a Forest Officer and may declare that all or
any of the provisions of this Act shall apply to such forest or land.
(2) The net profits, if any, arising from the management of such forest or land shall be
paid to the said owner.
Expropriation of forests in certain cases. – 38. (1) In any case under this Chapter in
which the State Government considers that in lieu of placing the forest or land under the
control and management of a Forest Officer, the same should be acquired for public purposes
the State Government may proceed to acquire it in the manner provided by the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894.
(2) The owner of any forest or land comprised in any notification under section 38, or
if there be more than one owner thereof, the owners of shares therein amounting in the
aggregate to at least two-thirds thereof, may at any time not less than three or more than
twelve years from the date thereof, require that such forest or land shall be acquired for
public purposes and the State Government shall acquire such forest or land accordingly.
Protection of forest at request of owner.- 39. (1) The owner of any land or, if there
be more than one owner thereof, the owners of shares therein amounting in the aggregate to
at least two-thirds thereof may, with a view to the formation or conservation of forest
thereon, represent in writing to the Deputy Commissioner their desire;
(a) that such land be managed on their behalf by the Forest Officer on such terms as
may be mutually agreed upon, or
(b) that all or any of the provisions of this Act be applied to such land.
(2) In either (case)1 the State Government may, by notification in the local Official
Gazette, apply to such land such provisions of this Act as it thinks suitable to the
circumstances thereof and as may be desired by the applicants.

CHAPTER VI
CONTROL OF FOREST PRODUCE IN TRANSIT
Power to make rules to regulate transit of forest produce.- 40. (1) The control of
all rivers and their banks as regards the floating of timber, as well as the control of forest
produce in transit by land or water, is vested in the State Government, and the Government
may make rules to regulate the transit of any forest produce.
(2) Such rules may, among other matters.
(a) prescribe the routes by which alone forest produce may be imported into, exported
from or moved within, to the territories which this Act extends;
(b) prohibit the import, export, collection or moving forest produce without a pass
from an officer authorized to issue the same, or otherwise than in accordance with
the conditions of such pass;
(c) provide for the issue, production and return of such passes;
(d) fix or authorize any Forest Officer, subject to the control of the State Government,
to fix the fees payable for such passes;
(e) in the caser of timber formed into a raft or fastened to the shore, prohibit the
loosening or the setting adrift of such timber by any person not the owner thereof
or not acting on behalf of such owner or of the Government.
(f) Provide for the stoppage, reporting, examination, and marking forest produce in
transit in respect o which there is reason to believe that any money is payable to
the Government or to which it is desirable, for the purposes of this Act, to affix a
mark;
(g) Established revenue stations to which forest produce is to be taken by the persons
in charge or for examination, or for the realization of such money,
____________________________________________________________________
Inserted vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.
or in order that such mark may be affixed to it, and prescribe, or authorize a Forest
Officer subject to such control as aforesaid to prescribe, conditions under which
forest produce is to be brought; stored at, and removed from such revenue
stations;
(h) provide for the management and control of such revenue stations and for
regulating the appointment and duties of persons employed thereat;
(i) authorize the transport of timber across any land and provide for the award and
payment of compensation for any damage done by transport of such timber;
(j) Prohibit the closing up or obstruction of the channel or banks of any river used for
the transit of forest produce, and the throwing of grass, bushwood, branches or
leaves into any such river, or any other act which tends to cause the obstruction of
such channel;
(k) Provide for the prevention and removal of any obstruction in the channel or on the
banks of any such river and for recovering the cost of such prevention or removal
from the person causing such obstruction;
(l) Prohibit absolutely or subject to conditions within specified local limits, the
establishment of sawpits, the converting, cutting, burning, concealing, marking or
super marking of timber, the altering or effacing of any marks on the same and
possession or carrying of marking hammers or other implements used for marking
timber; and
(m) Regulate the use of property-marks for timber and the registration of such marks,
authorize the refusal or cancellation of the registration of any property marks,
prescribe the time for which the registration of property marks is hold good, limit
the number of such marks which may be registered by any one person and provide
for the levy of fees for such registration.
(3) The State Government may direct that any rule made under this section shall not
apply to any specified class of timber or other forest produce or to any specified local area.
Penalties for breach of rules under the last foregoing section. – 41. (1) The State
Government may, by rule under the last foregoing section, attach to the breach of any rule
under that section any punishment not exceeding imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months, or fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or both.
(2) In cases where the offence is committed after sunset and before sunrise or after
preparation resistance to the execution of any law or any legal process, or where the offender
has been previously convicted of a like offence, the conviction court may inflict double the
penalty prescribed for such offence.
All persons bound to aid in case of accident at revenue station. – 42. In case of
any accident or emergency involving danger to any property at a revenue station, established
under a rule made under section 40, every person employed at such revenue station, whether
by the Government or by any private person, shall render assistance to any Forest Officer or
Police Officer demanding his aid in such danger and securing such property from damage or
loss.

CHAPTER VII
Collection of drift, stranded and other timber
Certain kinds of timber to be deemed the property of the State Government until
title thereto proved. – 43. (1) Timber falling under any of the following descriptions,
namely. –
(a) Timber found adrift, beached, stranded, or sunk,
(b) Timber bearing marks which had not been registered under section 40,
(c) Timber which has been super marked, or on which marks have been obliterated,
altered, or defaced by fire or otherwise, and
(d) In such areas as the State Government directs, all marked timber shall be deemed
to be the property of the State Government unless and until any person established
his right thereto as provided in this Chapter.
(2) Such timber may be collected by any Forest Officer or other person entitled to
collect the same, ;and may be brought to such stations as a Forest Officer specially
empowered in this behalf may from time to time notify as stations for the reception of drift
timber.
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette. Exempt any
class of timber from the provisions of this section and withdraw such exemption.
Notice to claimants of timber of those kinds. – 44. (1) Public notice shall, from time
to time, as occasion may require, be given by a Forest Officer specially empowered in this
behalf of timber collected under the last foregoing section.
(2) Such notice shall contain a description of the timber, and will require any person
claiming the same to present to such officer, within a period not less than one month from the
date on which such notice is given, a written statement of such claim.
Procedure on claim preferred to such timber. – 45. (1) When any such statement is
presented as aforesaid, the Forest Officer may, after making such enquiry as he thinks fir,
either reject the claim after recording his reasons for so doing or deliver the timber to the
claimant.
(2) If such timber is claimed by more than one person the Forest Officer may either
deliver the same to pay any of such persons whom he deems entitled thereto, or may refer the
claimants to the Civil Court for its disposal.
(3) Any person whose claim has been rejected under this section may within three
months from the date of such rejection, institute a suit to recover possession of the timber
claimed by him, but no person shall recover any compensation against the Government or
against any Forest Officer on account of such rejection, or the detention or removal of any
timber or the delivery thereof to any other person under this section.
(4) No such timber shall be subjected to process of any Civil Court until it has been
delivered, or a suit brought under this section has been decided.
Disposal of unclaimed timber. – 46. Where no statement is presented in the manner
and within the period prescribed by notice issued under section 44, or where such statement
having been so presented and the claim rejected, the claimant omits to institute a suit to
recover possession of such timber within the further period mentioned in section 45, the
ownership of such timber shall vest in the State Government free from all encumbrances or,
when such timber has been delivered to another person under section 45, in such other person
free from all encumbrances not created by him.
Payments to be made by claimant before timber is delivered to him. – 47. No
person shall be entitled to recover possession of any timber collected or delivered as aforesaid
until such sum as may be due for salving, collecting, moving, storing, and disposing of the
timber has been paid by him the Forest Officer or other person entitled to receive the sum.
Power to make rules and prescribe penalties. – 48. (1) The State Government may
make rules to regulate the following matters, namely –
(a) The salving, collection, and disposal of all timber mentioned in section 43;
(b) The use and registration of boats used in salving and collecting timber;
(c) the amount to be paid for salving, collecting, moving, storing, and disposing of
such timber; and
(d) the use and registration of hammers and other implements to be used for marking
such timber.
(2) The State Government may, by a rule under this section, attach to the breach of
any rule under this section any punishment not exceeding imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or both.

CHAPTER VIII
Penalties and procedure
Seizure of property liable to confiscation. – 49. (1) When there is reason to believe
that a forest offence has been committed in respect of any forest produce, such produce
together with all tools, boats, carts and cattle used in the commission of such alleged offence,
may be seized by any Forest Officer or Police Officer.
(2) Every officer seizing any property under this section shall place on such property,
or the receptacle, if any, in which it is contained, a mark indicating that the same has been so
seized, and shall as soon as may be, make a report of such seizure to the Magistrate having
jurisdiction to try the person accused of the offence on account of which the seizure has been
made:
Provided that when the forest produce with respect to which such offence is believed
to have been committed is the property of the Government and the offender is unknown, it
shall be sufficient if the officer makes, as soon as may be, a report of the circumstances to his
official superior.
Power to release property seized under section 49. – 50. Any Forest Officer of a
rank not inferior to that of a Forester who or whose subordinate has seized any tools, boats,
carts, or cattle under section 49, may release the same on the execution by the owner or the
person in charge thereof of a bond for the production of the property so released, if and when
so required before the Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the offence on account of which
the seizure has been made.
Procedure on receipt by Magistrate of report for seizure. – 51. Upon the receipt of
any such report, the Magistrate shall take such measures as may be necessary for the trial of
the accused and the disposal of the property according to law.
Forest produce, tools, etc. when [liable]1 to confiscation. – 52. (1) When any
person is convicted of a forest offence, all forest produce which is not the property of the
Government and in respect of which such offence has been committed, and all tools, boats.
Carts and cattle used in the commission of such offence, shall be liable, by order of the
convicting Court to confiscation.
(2) Such confiscation may be in addition to any other punishment prescribed for such
offence.
Disposal on conclusion of trial for forest offence of produce in respect of which it
was committed. – 53. When the trial of any forest offence in concluded, any forest produce
in respect of which such offence is concluded, any forest produce in respect of which such
offence has been committed shall, if it is the property of the Government or has been
confiscated, be taken possession of by a Forest Officer specially empowered in this behalf,
and, in any other case, shall be disposed of in such manner as the Court may order.
Procedure when offender is not known or cannot be found.- 54. (1) When the
offender is not known or cannot be found, the Magistrate inquiring inn the offence, if he finds
that an offence has been committed, may on application in this behalf, order the property in
respect of which the offence has been committed to be confiscated and taken possession of
by a Forest Officer specially empowered in this behalf, or to be made over to such Forest
Officer or other person as the Magistrate may consider entitled to the same:
Provided that no such order shall be made till the expiration of one month form the
date of the seizure of such property, or without hearing the person if any, claiming right
thereto and the evidence, if any, which he may produce in support of his claim.
(2) The Magistrate shall either cause a notice of any application under sub-section (1)
to be served upon any person whom he has reason to believe to be interested in the property
seized, or publish such notice in any way which he may thinks fit.
_____________________________________________________________________
Substituted vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.

Procedure as to perishable property seized under section 49.- 55. The Magistrate
may, notwithstanding anything herein before contained, direct the sale of any property seized
under section 49 and subject to speedy and natural decay, and may deal with the proceeds as
he might have dealt with such property if it had been sold.
Appeal for orders under sections 52, 53 and 54.- 56. Any person claiming to be
interested in property seized under section 49 may, within one month from the date of any
order passed by a Magistrate under section 52, section 53 or section 54, present on appeal
therefrom to the Court to which orders made by such Magistrate are ordinarily appealable,
and the order passed on such appeal shall be final.
Vesting of confiscated property in the State Government, - 47. When an order for
the confiscation of any property has been passed under section 52 or section 54, and the
period limited by section 51 for presenting an appeal from such order has elapsed, and no
such appeal being presented, or when, on such an appeal ahs been presented, the Appellate
Court confirms such order in respect of the whole or a portion of such property, such property
or portion, as the case may be shall vest in the State Government free from all encumbrances.
Saving of powers to release property seized. – 58. Nothing herein before contained
shall be deemed to prevent any Forest Officer or other officer empowered in this behalf by
the State Government from directing, at any time, the immediate release of any property
seized under section 49 which is not the property of the Government, and the withdrawal of
any charge made in respect of such property.
Punishment for wrongful seizure. – 59. (1) Any Forest Officer or Police Officer
who vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes any property on pretence of seizing property liable
to confiscation under this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
(2) Any fine so imposed, or any portion thereof shall if the convicting Court so direct,
be given as compensation to the person aggrieved by such seizure.
Penalty for counterfeiting or defacing marks on trees and timber and for altering
boundary marks. – 60. Whoever, with intent to cause damage or injury to the public or to
any person, or to cause wrongful gain as defined in the Indian Penal Court. –
(a) knowingly counterfeits upon any tree or timber a mark used by Forest Officer to
indicate that such tree or timber is the property of the Government or of some
person, or that it may lawfully be felled or removed by some person, or
(b) unlawfully affixes to any tree or timber a mark used by Forest Officers, or
(c) alters, defaces or obliterates any such mark placed on any tree or timber by or
under the authority of a Forest Officer, or
(d) alters, movers destroys, or defaces any boundary mark of any forest or waste land
to which any provisions of this Act apply, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two year, or with fine, or with both.
Power to arrest without warrant. – 61. (1) Any Forest Officer or Police Officer may
without orders from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person reasonably
suspected of having been concerned in an forest offence punishable with imprisonment for
one month or upwards, if such person refuses to give his name and residence or gives a name
or residence which there is reason to believe to be false, or if there is reason to believe that he
will abscond.
(2) Every officer making an arrest under this section shall, without unnecessary delay,
take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case or to the
officer in charge of the nearest police station.
(3) Any Forest Officer or Police Officer who vexatiously, or maliciously arrests any
person on the pretence that he is suspected of having been concerned in any forest offence or
otherwise as provided by section 61(1) of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees,
or with both.
(4) No Forest Officer or Police Officer shall detain in custody a person arrested under
sub-section (1) of this section for a longer period that under all the circumstances of the case
is reasonable; and such period shall not exceed twenty four hours exclusive of the time
necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate’s Court having
jurisdiction in the case.
Power to prevent commission of offence. – 62. It shall be the duty of every Forest
Officer and Police Officer to prevent, and any such officer may interfere for the purpose of
preventing, the commission of any forest offence.
Power to compound offences. – 63. (1) The State Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, empower a Forest Officer by name, or as holding in office, -
(a) to accept from any person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has
committed any forest offence, other than an offence specified in section 59, or
person is suspected to have committed, and
(b) when any property has been seized as liable to confiscation, to release the same on
payment of the value thereof as estimated by such officer.
(2) On the payment of such sum of money, or such value, or both, as the case may be,
to such officer, the suspected person, if in custody, shall be discharged, the property, if any,
seized shall be released and not further proceedings shall be taken against such person or
property.
(3) No Forest Officer shall be empowered under this section unless he is a Forest
Officer of a rank not inferior to that of a Forest Ranger, and is in receipt of a monthly salary
amounting to at least two hundred fifty and the sum of money accepted as compensation
under sub-section (1) clause (a), shall in no case exceed the sum of fifty rupees.
Compensation for damage caused by commission of offences. – 64. (1) When any
person is convicted of felling, cutting, girdling, marking, loping or tapping trees, or of
injuring them by fire or otherwise, in contravention of this Act or of any rule thereunder, the
convicting Court may, in addition to any other punishment which it may award, order that
person to pay to the State Government such compensation, not exceeding twenty rupees for
each tree with respect to which the offence was committed, as it may deem just.
(2) If the person convicted of the offence committed was the agent or servant of
another person, the convicting Court may, of after hearing that other person, it is satisfied that
the commission of the offence was a consequence of his instigation, or of any neglect or
default on his part, order him, instead of the person who committed the offence, to pay the
compensation referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) An appeal from any order under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall lie to the
Court to which orders made by the convicting Court are ordinarily appealable and the order
passed on such appeal shall be final.
Forfeiture of leases. – 65. When the holder of any lease, license or contract
whatsoever granted or continued by, or on behalf of the Government for any of the purposes
of this Act commits an offence against this Act or any rule thereunder, or
When any such offence is committed by any agent or servant of the holder of any
such lease, license or contract, and the State Government is satisfied that the commission of
the offence was a consequence of the instigation of such holder or of any neglect or default
on his part, the State Government may, by order in writing, declare the lease, license or
contract to the forfeited in whole or in part with effect on and from a date to be specified in
the order not being prior to the date of the commission of the offence.
CHAPTER IX
CATTLE TRESPASS
Cattle trespass Act 1871 to apply. – 66. Cattle trespassing in a reserved forest or in a
village forest shall be deemed to be cattle doing damage to public plantation within the
meaning of section 11 of the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871, and may be seized and impounded as
such by any Forest Officer or Police Officer.
67. The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that in
lieu of the fines fixed [in lieu of the fines fixed under section 12 of the Cattle Trespass Act,
1871]1 there shall be levied for each head of cattle impounded under section 66 of this Act
such fines as it thinks fit, but not exceeding the following, namely –

Substituted vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.
Rs. P.
For each elephant - - 20.00
For each buffalo or mithun -- 5.00
For each horse, mare, gelding, pony
colt, filly, mule, bull, bullock, cow, or heifer -- 2.00
For each calf, ass, pig, sheep, lamb, goat, or kid -- 1.00

CHAPTER X
FOREST OFFICERS
Investiture of forest Officers with certain powers. - 68. (1) The State Government
may invest any Forest Officer by name, or as holding an office, with all or any of the
following powers, namely –
(a) power to enter upon any land and to survey, demarcate, and make a map of the
same;
(b) the powers of a Civil Court to compel the attendance of witness and the
production of document, [and materials objects]1.
(c) power to issue search-warrants under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898;
(d) power to hold inquiries into forest offences, and in the course of such inquiries to
receive and record evidence;
(e) power to notify the seasons and manner in which fire may be kindled, kept or
carried in a reserved forest;
(f) power to grant any permission referred to in section 25 and 35;
(g) power to notify stations for the reception of drift timber;
(h) power to give public notice of timber collected under section 43;
(i) power to take possession of property under this Act; and may withdraw any power
so conferred;
1. Inserted Nagaland Act 9 of 1969.
(j) power to direct the release of property or withdrawal of charges;
(2) Any evidence recorded under clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be admissible in
any subsequent trial before a Magistrate of the alleged offender:
Provided that it has been taken in the presence of the accused person and recorded in
the manner provided by section 355, section 356 or section 357 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898.
Forest Officers deemed public servants. – 69. All Forest Officers shall be deemed
to be public servants within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code.
Indemnity for Acts done in good faith. – 70. No suit or criminal prosecution shall
lie against any public servant for anything done or omitted by him in good faith under this
Act.
Forest Officers not to trade. – 71. No forest Officer shall as principal or agent, trade
in forest produce, or be or become interested in any lease or mortgage or any forest, or in any
contract for working any forest, whether in India or foreign territory.

CHAPTER XI
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISION
Additional powers to make rules. – 72. The State Government may make rules
consistent with this Act: -
(a) to declare by what Forest Officer or class of Forest Officers the powers or duties
conferred or imposed by or under this Act on a Forest Officer are to be exercised
or performed.;
(b) to regulate the procedure of Forest Settlement Officers;
(c) to provide for the ejectment of any person who has encroached upon reserves;
(d) to regulate the rewards to be paid to Officers and informers; and
(e) generally, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Rules when to have force of law. – 73. (a) All rules made by the State Government
under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall thereupon have
the force of law.
(b) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before the Nagaland Legislative Assembly while it is in session for a total period
of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the
sessions immediately following the Nagaland Legislative Assembly agree in
making any modification in the rule or the Nagaland Legislative Assembly agree
that the rule should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Person bound to assist Forest Officer and Police Officer. – 74. (1) Every person
who exercises any right in a reserved forest or village forest, or who is permitted to remover
any forest produce from, or to pasture cattle, or practice jhum cultivations in such forest, and
every person who is employed by such person in such forest, and every person in any village
contiguous to such forest who is employed by the Government or who receives emoluments
from the Government for services to be performed to the community, shall be bound to
furnish, without unnecessary delay, to the nearest Forest Officer or Police Officer any
information which he may possess respecting the occurrence of a fire in or near such forest,
or the omission of or intention to commit, any forest offence, and shall assist any Forest
Officer or Police Officer demanding his aid -
(a) in extinguishing any fire occurring in such forest;
(b) in preventing any fire which may occur in the vicinity of such forest from
spreading to such forest;
(c) in preventing the commission in such forest of any forest officer; and
(d) when there is person to believe that any such offence has been committed in such
forest in discovering and arresting the offender.

[(2) Any person who, being bound so to do, without lawful excuse (the burden of
proving which shall lie upon such person) fails –
(a) to furnish without unnecessary delay to the nearest Forest Officer or Police
Officer any information required by sub-section (1);
(b) to take steps as required by sub-section (1) to extinguish any forest fire in a
reserved or protected forest;
(c) to prevent, as required by sub-section (1) any fire in the vicinity of such forest
from spreading to such forest; or
(d) to assist any Forest Officer or Police Officer demanding his aid in preventing the
commission in such forest of any forest offence or, when there is reason to believe
that any such offence has been committed in such forest in discovering and
arresting the offender;
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both..]
[74-A If any person be entitled to a share in the produce of any forest which is the
property of Government or over which the Government has proprietary rights or to any part
of the forest produce of which the Government is entitled, upon the condition of fully
performing any service connected with such forest, such share shall be liable to confiscation
in the event of the fact being established to the satisfaction of the State Government that such
service is no longer so performed: Provided that no such share shall be confiscated until the
person entitled thereto, and the evidence, if any, which he may produce in proof of the due
performance of such service, have been heard by any officer duly appointed in that behalf by
the State Government.”]2
Recovery of money due to the Government. – 75. All money, other than fines,
payable to the Government under this Act, or under any rule made thereunder, or on account
of the price of any forest produce, or of expenses incurred in the execution of this Act in
respect of any forest produce may, if not paid when due, be recovered under the Bengal
Public Demands Recovery Act, 1913 (Bengal Act 3 of 1913) or under any other law for the
time being inforce.

1. Inserted as sub-section (2) of Section 74 vide Nagaland 9 of 1969.
2. Inserted vide Nagaland Act 9 of 1969 as Section 74A.
Lien on forest produce for such money . - 76. (1) When any such money is payable
for, or in respect of, any forest produce, the amount thereof shall be deemed to be a first
charge on such produce, and such produce may be taken possession of by a Forest Officer
specially empowered in this behalf and may be retained by him until such amount has been
paid.
(2) If such amount is not paid when due, such Forest Officer may sell such produce by
public auction, and proceeds of the sale shall be applied first in discharging such amount.
(3) The surplus, if any, it not claimed within two months from the date of sale by the
person entitled thereto, shall be forfeited to the Government.
Government and its Officers not liable for loss or damage in respect of certain
forest produce . – 77. The Government shall not be responsible for any loss or damage
which may occur in respect of any forest produce while at a revenue station established under
a rule made under section 40, or while detained elsewhere for the purposes of this Act or in
respect of any timber collected under section 43, and no Forest Officers shall be responsible
for any such loss or damage unless he shall have caused the same negligently maliciously, or
fraudulently.
Land required under this Act to be decided for public purpose. – 78. Whenever it
appears to the State Government that any land is required for any of the purposes of this Act,
such land shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose within the meaning of section 4
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or section (3) of the Nagaland Land (Requisition and
Acquisition) Act, 1965.
Recovery of penalties due under bound. – 79. When any person, in compliance with
any rule under this Act, binds himself by any instruments to perform any duty or Act or
covenants by any instruments that he or that he and his servants and agents, will abstain from
any Act, the whole sum mentioned in such instrument as the amount to be paid in case of a
breach of the conditions thereof may notwithstanding anything in section 74 of the Indian
Contract Act, 1872, be recovered from him in case of such breach under the Bengal Public
Demands Recovery Act, 1913 (Bengal Act 3 of 1913) or under any other law for the time
being in force.
80. The Assam Forest Regulation, 1891, as applicable to Nagaland except Section 37,
and 39 in Chapter V and section 40 A in Chapter VI thereof shall stand repealed: -
Provided that such repeal shall not affect –
(a) the previous operation of the said Regulation or anything duly done or suffered
thereunder; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the
said Regulation; or
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence
committed against the said Regulation; or
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right,
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid;
Provided further that anything done or any action taken including any appointment or
delegation made, rule, notification instruction or direction made, certificate or permission
granted under the Regulation hereby repealed shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provision of this Act and shall continue to be in force accordingly
unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.