An Act to provide the restriction of ribbon development
along highways, for the prevention and removal of
encroachment thereon, for the construction, maintenance
and development of highways, for the levy of betterment
charges and for certain other matters.
Preamble.- WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the restriction of ribbon
development along the highways, for the prevention, removal of encroachment thereon, for
the construction, maintenance and development of highways, for the levy of betterment
charges and for certain other matters;
It is hereby enacted in the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

Short title, extent and commencement. – 1. (1) This Act may be called the
Nagaland Highways Act, 1967.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Nagaland.
(3) It applies to the highways of the State except the National Highways, declared as
such by the Central Government under the National Highways Act, 1956.
(4) This section shall come into force at once. The State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any of the remaining provisions of this
Act shall come into force in such area and on such date as may be specified in the
notification;
Provided that the State Government may, by notification issued in like manner,
exclude any roads or ways or class of roads or ways situated in such area from the operation
of all or any of the provisions of this Act.
Definitions. (2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires –
(a) “animal” means any domestic or captive animal.
(b) “building” includes any erection of whatsoever material and in whatsoever
manner constructed (including a farm building for agricultural purposes) and also
includes plinths, door-steps, walls (including compound walls and fences)
advertisement boards and the like.
(c) “building line” means a line on either side of any highway or part of a highway
fixed in respect of such highway or part by a notification under sub-section (1) of
(d) “Cantonment” means a Cantonment established under the Cantonments Act, 1924
(2 of 1924 );
(e) “Control line” means a line on either side of a highway or part of a highway
beyond the building line fixed in respect of such highway or part by notification
under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(f) “encroachment” means any unauthorized occupation of any highway or part
thereof and includes an unauthorized –
(i) erection of a building or any other structure, balconies porches, projection on
or over or overhanging the highway;
(ii) occupation of a highway beyond the prescribed period, if any, for stacking
building materials or goods of any other description, for exhibiting articles for
sale, for erecting poles, awnings, tents, pandals, hoardings and other similar
erections or for parking vehicles or stabling animals or for any other purposes;
(iii) excavations or dumps of any sort made or extended on any highway or
underneath such highway;
(g) “to erect” with its grammatical variations in relation to a building means to
construct, reconstruct, extend or alter structurally a building;
(h) “excavation” relating to any piece of all does not include any working which do
not piece the surface of that piece of land, but includes wells and tanks;
(i) “highway” means any road or way over which the public have a right of way or
are granted access and which is declared to be a highway under section 3.

The Expression Includes
(i) any land acquired or demarcated with a view to constructing a highway along
it;
(ii) the slopes, berms, barrow-pits, footpaths, pavements and side, catch and
boundary drains attached to such a road or way;
(iii) all bridges, culverts, causeways, carriageways and other structures built on or
across such road or way; and
(iv) the trees, fences posts, boundary, half kilometre and kilometre stones and
other highway accessories and materials and materials stacked on the road or
way;
(j) “Highway Authority” means the authority appointed as such or to which the
functions of such authority are entrusted under section 4;
(k) “Highway boundaries” means the boundaries of a highway fixed in respect of
such highway by a notification under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(l) “means of access” includes any means of access whether private or public, for
vehicles or for foot passengers and includes any street;
(m) “middle of highway” means a point halfway between the highway boundaries;
(n) “occupier” includes. –
(i) any person who for the time being, is paying or is liable to pay to the owner
rent or any portion of the rent of the premises in respect of which such rent if
paid or is payable;
(ii) any owner living in or otherwise using the premises;
(iii) rent-free tenant;
(iv) any person who is liable to pay to the owner damages for the use and
occupation of any premises;
(o) “owner” means. –
(a) When used with reference to any premises, the person who receives the rent of
the said premises or who would be entitled to received the rent thereof if the
premises were let and includes, -
(i) an agent or trustee who receives such rent on account of the owner;
(ii) an agent or trustee who receives the rent of or is entrusted with, or
concerned for, any premises devoted to religious or charitable purposes;
(iii) a receiver or manager appointed by any court of competent jurisdiction,
and
(iv) a mortgagee-in-possession;
(b) When used with reference to an institution or a body corporate, the manager of
such institution or body corporate;
(p) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(q) “Railway administration” has the same meaning as in the Indian Railways Act,
(9 of 1890 );
(r) “Vehicle” includes a barrow, sledge, plough drag and a wheeled conveyance of
any description capable of being used on a highway;
(s) the expressions “land” “persons interested” and “persons entitled to act” used in
this Act shall have the same meaning as the said expressions have in the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 ( 1 of 1894 ).

CHAPTER II
DECLARATION OF
HIGHWAYS, HIGHWAY AUTHORITIES AND THEIR
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS
Declaration of roads, ways or lands as highways.- 3. The State Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, declare any road, way or land to be a highway and
classify it as. –
(i) A State highway (special)
(ii) A State highway;
(iii) A major district road;
(iii) Other district road; or
(iv) A village road.
Appointment of Highway Authorities. – 4. The State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette appoint for the purpose of this Act or any of its provisions,
any person or any authority to be a Highway Authority for all highways in the State or in
parts of the State, or for any particular highway or highways in the State specified in the
notification.
Powers and duties of Highway Authorities. – 5. Subject to such conditions as may
be specified in the notification appointing a Highway Authority and subject to the general or
special orders of the State Government, a Highway Authority shall exercise powers and
discharge duties in accordance with the provisions of this Act, for the restriction of ribbon
development along highways, for the prevention and removal of encroachments and for all
matters necessary and incidental to any or all of the above subject. Subject to the approval of
the State Government and to such general or special order which the State Government may
make in this behalf, it shall be lawful for a Highway Authority to undertake the construction,
maintenance development or improvement of highways.
Officers and servants Highway Authority. – 6. For the purpose of enabling a
Highway Authority to exercise the powers conferred and to discharge the duties imposed
upon it by or under the provisions of this Act, the State Government may appoint such
officers or servants as it deems necessary to work under such Authority.

CHAPTER III
RESTRICTION OF RIBBON DEVELOPMENT
Power to fix boundary of building and control lines of Highways. – 43. (1) In any
area in which the provisions of this Act, have been brought into force; and
(i) Where any road, way or land has been declared to be a highway under section 3, or
(ii) Where the construction or development of a highway is undertaken, the State
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix as respects such
highway, the highway boundary, the building line and the control line;
Provided that having regard to the situation of the requirement of a highway or the
condition of the local area through which the highway passes, it shall be lawful for the State
Government: -
(i) to fix different building or control lines, or;
(ii) not to fix building or control lines in respect of any highway or portion thereof;
(2) Not less than sixty days before issuing a notification under sub-section (1) the
State Government shall cause to be published in the Official Gazette and in the prescribed
manner in the village and at the headquarters of the circle in which the highway is situated, a
notification stating that it proposes to issue a notification in terms of sub-section (1) and
specifying therein all the lands situated between the highway boundary and the control line
proposed to be fixed under such notification and in case of new works, also lands benefiting
by the construction or development of the highway, as the case may be, together with a notice
requiring all person affected by such notification, who wish to make any objections or
suggestions with respect to the issue of such a notification, to submit their objections or
suggestions in writing to the Highway Authority or appear before such Authority, within two
months of the publication of the notification in the Official Gazette or within one month from
the date of publication of the notification in the village, whichever period expires later.
(3) The Highway Authority shall, after all such objections or suggestions have been
considered or heard, as the case may be, and after such further enquiry, if any, as it thinks
necessary, forward to the State Government a copy of the record of its proceedings held by it
together with a report setting forth its recommendation on the subject or suggestion.
(4) If, before the expiry of the time allowed by sub-section (2) for filing or hearing of
objections or suggestions, no objection or suggestion has been made, the State Government
shall proceed at once to issue the notification under sub-section (1). If any such objection or
suggestion has been made, the State Government shall consider the record and the report,
referred to in sub-section (3) and may either, -
(a) abandon the proposal to issue the notification under sub-section (1); or
(b) issue the notification under sub-section (1) with such modification, if any as it
thinks fit.
(5) In considering the objections or suggestions decision of the State Government on
the question of issuing the notification under sub-section (1) shall be final and conclusive.
Map to be prepared and maintained. –8. Within two months from the date of
publication of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 7 fixing the highway
boundary, building line and control line with respect to any highway, the Highway Authority
shall cause a map to be made of the area through which such highway passes and shall cause
to be marked thereon the highway boundaries and building and control lines and any other
particulars necessary for the purposes of this Act, and within one month from the date of
making any alteration or addition thereto cause the said map to be corrected and such map
with the date indicated thereon of the last time when the same shall have been so corrected
shall be kept in the office of the Highway Authority. Such map which shall bear the seal of
the Highway Authority shall be open to inspection. Copies of such map shall also be kept for
inspection at such other places as may be prescribed.
Restrictions on buildings between highway boundary and building line and
between building and control lines. – 9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
law, custom, agreement or instrument for time being in force on or after the appointed day,
the following restrictions shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be in force, that is to say,
-
No person shall, without the previous permission in writing of the Highway
Authority. –
(a) upon any land lying between the highway boundary and the building line
proposed to be fixed under sub-section (2), or fixed under sub-section (1) of
section (7), as the case may be. –
(i) construct, form or lay out any means of access to, or from, a highway, or
(ii) erect any building, or
(iii) materially alter any existing building; or
(iv) make or extend any excavation; or
(v) construct, form or lay out any works; or
(b) upon any land lying between the building line and the control line proposed to be
fixed under sub-section (2), or fixed under sub-section (1) of section (7), as the
case may be;
(i) construct, form or lay out means of access to, or form a highway, or
(ii) erect any building; or
(iii) materially alter any existing building;
(c) use any building or alter the use of any building already erected in a manner
which in the opinion of the Highway Authority, will in any manner whatsoever,
infringe any of the provisions of this Act or interfere with the use of a highway
adjoining the land on which such building is erected.
(2) Every person desiring to obtain such permission under sub-section (1) shall make
an application in writing to the Highway Authority in such form and containing such
information as may be prescribed in respect of the building, alteration, excavation works or
means of access, as the case may be, to which the application relates.
(3) On receipt of such application, the Highway Authority, after making such
enquiries as it may consider necessary, shall, by order in writing, either, -
(a) grant the permission, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the
order, or
(b) refuse to grant such permission;
Provided that, -
(i) Permission under clause (a) of sub-section (1) to the making of any
excavation or construction, formation or laying out of works in any land for
the purpose of repairing, renewing, enlarging or maintaining any underground , sewer, drain, electrical line, pipe, duct or any other apparatus shall
not be withheld nor be made subject to any conditions save such as may be
necessary for securing that the sewer, drain, electric line pipe, duct or other
apparatus shall be laid in such manner and at such levels, that the
construction, maintenance, development or improvement of a road,
thereover will not be prevented or prejudicially affected thereby;
(ii) permission under clause (b) of sub-section (1) to the erection or alteration of
a building or laying out and means of access to a highway which conforms
to the requirements of public health, and welfare and of safety and
convenience of traffic on the adjoining road shall neither be withheld nor
made subject to unreasonable condition.
Provided that in the case of means of access required for agricultural purposes such
permission shall neither be withheld nor be made subject to any conditions save such as may
be necessary for securing that the means of access shall be used for agricultural purposes
only;
(iii) permission under clause (b) of sub-section (i) to the re-erection or alteration
of a building which was in existence before the appointed day shall neither
be withheld nor made subject to restrictions unless such re-election or
alteration involves any material alteration to the outside appearance of the
building.
(4) When the Highway Authority refuses permission, the reasons thereof shall be
recorded and communicated to the applicant;
Provided that nothing herein contained shall disentitle a person from making a fresh
application after omitting therefrom the objectionable features communicated to his as
aforesaid on account of which such permission was refused.
(5) If at the expiry of a period of three months after an application for such permission
specifying the name and address of the applicant has been made to the Highway Authority, or
such further period not exceeding three months as may have been notified by the Highway
Authority has elapsed and no decision has been notified in writing, posted or delivered to the
applicant at the address, then (except as may otherwise be agreed in writing between the
Highway Authority and the applicant) permission shall be deemed to have been given
without the imposition by the Highway Authority of any conditions.
(6) The Highway Authority shall maintain a register with sufficient particulars of all
permissions given or refused by it under this section and the register shall be available for
inspection free of charge by all persons interested and such persons shall be entitled to take
extract therefrom.
Explanation:- For the purpose of this section the “appointed day” shall with
reference to any highway boundary, building line or control line, mean-0
(i)the day on which a notification is published in the Official Gazette under subsection (2) of section 7 proposing to fix such highway boundary, building line or
control line, and
(ii) if any modification is made in such highway boundary, building line or control
line, the day on which he notification is published under sub-section (1) of section 7 fixing
such boundary, building line or control line.
Appeal.-10. (1) If any applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the Highway
Authority under section 9 withholding permission, or imposing any condition, he may appeal
to the prescribed authority within thirty days from the date on =which such decision was
communicated to him.
(2) The prescribed authority, may, after giving an opportunity to the applicant to be
heard make such order as it thinks fir upon the appeal and its decision shall be final.
Exemptions for works in progress etc.-11 (1 ) No restriction in force under section 9
shall apply to erection or making of a building or excavation or to the construction, formation
or laying out, of any means of access or works begun before the appointed day referred to in
(2) No restriction in force under section 9 except restriction as to the construction,
formation or laying out, of means of access, shall apply to any land forming part of a burial or
cremation ground or other p0lace for disposal of dead, being the land which has, before ]the
passing of this Act, been used for such purpose.
(3) No restriction in force under Section 9 shall apply to any excavation or works
necessary in connection with any drains, ditches, or the drainage works for agricultural
purposes or to any works necessary for the repair. Renewal, enlargement or maintenance of
any sewer, drain, electric line, pipe, duct or other apparatus, constructed in or upon the land
before the date on which the restriction came into force or with the consent of the Highway
Authority on or after that date.
Setting back of buildings to building-line or control-line. -12. Whenever any
building or any part thereof erected before the appointed day referred to in section 9 lies
between the building line and the middle of the highway, the Highway Authority may,
whenever any such building or part has either entirely or in greater part been taken down,
burnt down or fallen down, by notice require such building or part when re-erected to be set
back to the building line or control line.
Regulation or division of right of access to Highway. -13 (1) The Highway
Authority may, if it is considered essential in the interest of safety or convenience of traffic,
regulate or divert any existing right of access to a highway across the land between the
control line and the highway boundary;
Provided that the existing right of access shall not be diverted until alternative access
has been given.
(2) Where the existing right of access is diverted the point at which alternative access
is given to the highway shall not be unreasonably distant from the existing point of access.
(3) The Highway Authority shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, publish the
date on which the existing right of access has been diverted and alternative access has been
given.
Powers of Highway Authority officers and servants appointee under section 6 in
respect of surveys.-14. For the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of this Act, the
Highway Authority and the Officers and servants appointed under section 6 may,
(a) enter upon, survey and take measurements and levels of any land;
(b) mark such levels, dig or bore into subsoil of any land;
(c) demarcate the boundaries of the highway by planting stones or other suitable
marks in different colours of durable nature at intervals along all the highway in
such a manner that the line adjoining such stones or marks imaginary shows the
road boundary correctly;
(d) Where there are bends or kinks on the road boundary, locate the stone or marks in
different colours so as to give the correct configuration of the boundary if they are
joined by straight lines;
(e) Give consecutive numbers to such boundary stones or marks and maintain them
on the ground as if they constituted part of the highway;
(f) Lay out the building and control lines by placing marks in different colours and
cutting trenches;
(g) if the survey cannot otherwise be made or measurement or levels taken or
boundaries marked and lines laid out, cut down and clear away any standing crop,
tree, fence, jungle or any part thereof;
(h) do all other acts necessary in that behalf;
Provided that the Highway Authority shall not, except with the consent of the
occupier thereof enter or permit any of the officer or servants to enter any premises without
previously giving such occupier at least twenty four hours’ notice in writing of its intention to
do so.
Acquisition of land or right or interest in land.-15. If at any time on the application
of the Highway Authority, the State Government is satisfied that any land required for the
purposes of a highway or any right or interest of any person in any land required for the said
purposes should be compulsorily acquired or extinguished, as the case may be, it shall be
lawful for the State Government to publish a notification to that effect in the Official Gazette.
Such notification shall also be published in such other manner as may be prescribed. A
notification so published shall be deemed to be the declaration that the lad is needed or as the
case may be the right or interest is required to be extinguished for the purposes of the
highway; and such declaration shall be conclusive that the land is so needed or the right or
interest is so required to be extinguished.
Land required to be marked and measure.-16. The Highway Authority or any
officer or servant authorized by the Highway Authority shall thereupon cause the land to be
marked out. It shall also cause it to be measured and if no plan is made thereof a plan to be
made of the same.
Public notice and other notices of such requirements for acquisition. -17. (1) The
Highway Authority shall then cause a public notice to be given at convenient places on or
near such land stating that the State Government intends to take possession of the land and
that claims to compensation for all interest in such land, or any right or interest in land to be
extinguished may be made to such officer as the Highway Authority may designate.
(2) Such notice shall state particulars of the land so needed or right or interest in land
to be extinguished and shall require all persons interested in the land or in the right or interest
to be extinguished to appear personally or by agent before such officer as may be designated
at the time therein mentioned ( such time not being earlier than fifteen days after the date of
publication of the notice) and to state the nature of their respective right or interest in the land
or, as the case may be, in the right or interest to be extinguished and the amount and the
particulars of the claims to compensation for such right or interest or both and their
objections, if any, to the measurements made under section 16. The Highway Authority may,
in any case, require such statements to be made in writing and signed by the party or his
agent.
(3) The Highway Authority shall also serve notice to the same effect on the occupier
of such land and on all such persons known or believed to be interested therein or to be
entitled to act for persons so interested, as reside or have agents authorized, receive service
on their behalf within the district in which the land in situated.
(4) In case any person so interested resides elsewhere, a notice shall be served in the
manner provided in section 71.
Persons required to make statements regarding other persons having interests. –
18. (1) The Highway Authority or the officer authorized by it may also require any such
person to make or deliver to it or him at a time not being earlier than fifteen days after the
date of requisition, a statement containing, as far as may be practicable, the name of every
other person possessing any interest in the land or in any part thereof or, as the case may be,
in any right or interest in the land to be extinguished as co-proprietor, mortgagee, tenant or
otherwise, and of the nature of such interest, and of the rents and profits if any, received or
receivable on account thereof in respect of three years next preceding the date of such
statement.
(2) Every person required to make or deliver a statement under this section or under
and 176 of the Indian Penal Code.
Taking possession of land. – 19. At any time after the publication of the notification
under section 15, the State Government may direct that the lands specified in the notification
shall be taken possession of, or as the case may be, the right or interest specified therein shall
be extinguished from such date the said land shall vest absolutely in the State Government
free from all encumbrances, or as the case may be, such right or interest therein shall be
extinguished.

CHAPTER IV
PREVENTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPATION OF AND ENCROACHMENT ON
A HIGHWAY AND REMOVAL
OF ENCROACHMENT

Lands forming part of Highway deemed to be Government property. – 20. All
lands forming part of the highway which do not already vest in the State Government shall,
for the purpose of his Chapter be deemed to be the property of the State Government.
Prevention of unauthorized occupation of Highway. – 21. (1) No person shall
occupy or encroach on any highway within the highway boundary without obtaining the
previous permission in writing of the Highway Authority or an officer authorized in this
behalf by the Highway Authority.
(2) The Highway Authority or an officer authorized by the Highway Authority in this
behalf may with due regard to the safety and convenience of traffic and subject to such
condition as may be imposed and such rules as may be prescribed by the State Government
and on payment of such rent or other charges as may be prescribed under such rules permit
any person, -
(i) to place a temporary encroachment on any highway in front of any building
owned by him or make a temporary structure overhanging the highway, or
(ii) to put up a temporary awning or tent, pandal, other similar erection or a temporary
stall or scaffolding on any highway, or
(iii) to deposit or cause to be deposited building materials, goods for sale or other
article on any highway, or
(iv) to make temporary excavation for carrying out any repairs or improvements to the
adjoining buildings;
Provided that no such permission shall be deemed to be valid beyond the period of
one year unless expressly renewed by the Highway Authority or the authorized officer.
(3) The permission so granted shall clearly specify the date upto which the person of
one year is authorized to occupy the highway, the periods for which occupation is authorized
and the exact portion of the highway permitted to be occupied, and shall also be accompanied
by a plan or a sketch of that portion of the highway, if necessary.
(4) The person in whose favour such permission has been given shall produce the
permit for inspection whenever called upon to do so by the Highway Authority or any officer
by a general or special order empowered in that behalf and shall at the end of the period
specified in the permit release the land occupied by him after restoring it to the same state as
before the occupation by him.
(5) The Highway Authority or the officer issuing the permission shall maintain a
complete record of such permissions issued, and shall also cause a check up to be made in
every case at the expiry of the period up to which occupation has been authorized to ensure
that the land has actually been vacated.
Power to cancel permit. – 22. (1) The Highway Authority, may cancel any
permission granted under section 21, -
(a) if any rent or charge is not duly paid;
(b) if the purpose for which the permission was given has ceased to exist;
(c) in the event of any breach by the holder of such permission of any terms or
condition of such permission;
(d) if the land on which such encroachment has been made is required for any public
purpose or such encroachment is causing impediment or danger to traffic.
(2) Where the permission has been cancelled under clause (b) or (d) of sub-section (1)
any rent or charge paid in advance shall be refunded to the holder of such permission less that
amount, if any, due to the State Government.
Prevention of encroachment. – 23. (1) When as a result of check of highway
boundaries made or otherwise it transpires that an encroachment has taken place on a
highway, the Highway Authority or the officer authorized under sub-section (1) of section 21
shall serve a notice on the person responsible for the encroachment or his representative
requiring him to remove such encroachment and restore, the land to its original condition
before the encroachment within the period specified in the notice.
(2) The notice shall specify the land encroached upon and the time limit within which
such encroachment shall be removed and shall also state that failure to comply within the
specified period shall render the person liable to prosecution and also to summary eviction.
(3) If the encroachment is not removed within the time limit specified in the notice
and no valid cause is shown for non-compliance, the Highway Authority or the authorized
officer referred to in sub-section (1) may prosecute such person for his having made or
caused the encroachment and for his failure to remove it within the specified time.
(4) Where the encroachment is made for the purpose of exposing articles for sale,
opening temporary booths for vending or other like purpose of a trivial nature the Highway
Authority or the authorized officer referred to in sub-section (10 may with the help of the
police, if necessary, have such encroachment summarily remove without issuing a notice as
required by sub-section (1) or in lieu of removal of encroachment, may give the person
responsible for encroachment option of executing a lease in favour of the Highway Authority
on payment of rent for the area encroachment.
(5) When the encroachment is of a temporary nature and can easily be removed, but is
not such as can be described as trivial within the meaning of sub-section (4) the Highway
Authority or the authorized officer referred to in sub-section (1) may in addition to or in lieu
of prosecuting the person responsible for the encroachment under sub-section (3) have the
encroachment summarily removed with the assistance of police, if necessary.
(6) Where the encroachment is of such a nature that its immediate removal is
considered essential in the interest of safety of traffic on the highway or the safety of any
structure forming part of the highway, the Highway Authority or the authorized officer
referred to in sub-section (1) may in addition to the prosecution of the person responsible for
the encroachment under sub-section (3), either-
(i) have such protective work as may be feasible at a reasonable cost carried out so as
to minimize the danger to traffic on the highway, or
(ii) have the encroachment removed with the help of the police, it necessary.
Appeal against notice served under sub-section (1) of section 23. – 24. Where the
person on whom notice to remove an encroachment has been served under sub-section (1) of
property or that he has acquired a right over it by virtue of adverse possession or otherwise he
shall, within the time limit prescribed in the notice for the removal of encroachment, file an
appeal before the Deputy Commissioner under intimation to the Highway Authority or the
officer authorized under sub-section (1) of section 21, as the case may be. The Deputy
Commissioner shall after due enquiry, record his decision in writing and communicate the
same to the appellant and the Highway Authority or such officer. The Highway Authority or
such officer shall till then desist from revision to Government taking further action in the
matter.
Recovery of cost of removal of encroachment. – 25. (1) Whenever the Highway
Authority or the officer authorized under sub-section (1) of section 21 has, under provision of
encroachment, the expenditure involved shall be recovered from the person responsible for
the encroachment in the manner hereinafter provided.
(2) A bill representing expenditure, including department charges, if any, incurred
shall be served by the Highway Authority or the authorized officer referred to in sub-section
(1) on the person responsible for the encroachment or his representative with a direction to
pay up the amount within the specified period to the authority mentioned in the bill.
(3) the bill shall be accompanied by a certificate from the Highway Authority or the
authorized officer referred to in sub-section (1) to the effect that the amount of expenditure
indicated in the bill represents the charge incurred and such a certificate shall be conclusive
proof that the charge had actually been incurred.
(4) The material, if any, recovered as a result of the removal of any encroachment
shall be handed over to the person responsible for the encroachment, on payment of amount
of the bill by him, but in the event of his failure to pay up the amount within the specified
period, the materials may be sanctioned and after deducting the amount of the bill from the
proceeds, the balance if any, shall be paid to such person.
(5) If the proceeds of the auction sale do not cover the total amount billed for, the
excess over the amount realized by the sale of the materials or if there are no materials to be
disposed of and the billed amount has not been paid by the person responsible for the
encroachment within the specified period, the entire amount of the bill shall be covered from
such person as an arrear of public demand.

CHAPTER V
COMPENSATION
Doing minimum damage in certain cases and compensation. – 26. In the exercise
of the powers under the following provisions by the Highway Authority or any officer or
servant appointed under section 6 or any other person authorized by or under this Act by the
State Government as little damage as can be, shall be done and compensation in the manner
prescribed by or under this Act shall be paid to any person who sustains damage in
consequence of the exercise of such powers, namely;
the imposition of restriction under section 9;
the setting back of any building or part thereof under section 12;
the regulation or diversion of any right of access to a highway under section 13;
the entry, survey, measurement and doing of any of the acts on any land under
The acquisition of any land or extinguishment of any right or interest in the land
under section 15;
the closure of any highway or part thereof under section 52;
Determination of amount of compensation by agreement.- 27. The amount of
compensation payable under section 26, the persons to whom it is to be paid and the
apportionment of such amount among the persons interested therein, shall be determined by
agreement between the Highway Authority or any officer authorized by the State
Government and the person or persons claiming interest therein.
Determination of amount of compensation in default of agreement.- 28. (1) In
default of any agreement under section 27, the officer authorized by the State Government
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, after holding an enquiry, make an award
determining:-
(a) the true area of the land, if any, acquired;
(b) the amount of compensation to be paid under Section 26;
(c) the apportionment, if any, of such compensation amount among all persons known
or believed to be entitled thereto.
(2) In determining the amount of compensation, the matter specified in section 23 and
shall be taken into consideration.
No compensation of similar restrictions in force under any other law or if
compensation already received- 29. No compensation shall be awarded:-
(i) if and in so far as the land is subject to substantially similar restrictions in force
under some other law which was in force on the date on which the restriction were imposed
by this Act;
(ii) if compensation in respect of the same restriction imposed under this Act or
substantially similar restriction in force under any other law has already been paid in respect
of the land to the claimant or to any predecessor in the interest of the claimant.
Compensation for refusal of permission to build not to exceed difference between
its value when it was refused and when it would have been granted.- 30. When
permission to erect any building has been refused under section 9 and 10 the amount of
compensation shall not exceed the difference between the value of the land as determined by
of this Act and the value which it would have had if the permission had been granted. In
determining such value any restrictions to which the land is subject under any other law for
the time being in force in regard to right of person claiming compensation to erect a building
on the land or otherwise to use, hold or dispose of the same shall be taken into consideration.
Compensation for diversion of access not to exceed cost of alternative access.- 31.
Where the right of access to a highway has been destroyed as a result of the diversion or
closure thereof and an alternative access has been given the amount of compensation shall in
no case exceed the cost of laying a new means of access from the property of the claimant to
such alternative route.
Compensation for cutting of standing crops, trees etc.- 32. (1) At the time of entry,
survey or measurement or doing any of the things under section 14, the Officer making the
entry, survey or measurement or doing any other thing, shall pay or tender to any person
entitled compensation for all necessary damage done as a result of such entry, survey,
measurement or execution of work including the cutting of standing crops, trees or removal
of temporary structures, if any, on the land. If the sufficiency of the amount so paid or
tendered is disputed, the Officer concerned shall at once refer the dispute to such Officer as
may be authorized by the State Government and the said Officer shall with the least
practicable delay, decide the dispute and pay the person entitled the amount determined as
compensation. The decision of the State Government shall be final.
(2) If at the time of taking possession of the land under section 19, there are any
standing crops, trees or temporary structures on the land, the Highway Authority shall pay or
tender to the person entitled the amount of compensation for such standing crops, trees
temporary structures. If the sufficiency of such amount is disputed, the value of such crops,
trees and temporary structures shall be taken into consideration in determining amount of
compensation for the land under section 28.
No compensation for unauthorized erections.- 33 If any person has unauthorisedly
erected, re-erected, added or altered any building on any land which is acquired for the
purpose of a highway, then any increase in the value of the land from such erection, reerection, addition or alteration shall not be taken into account in estimating the value of the
land.
No compensation for removal of encroachment- 34. No compensation shall be
payable for removal of any encroachment.
Reference against the award of Highway Authority or authorized officer under
officer authorized under section 28 may, by written application to such officer, require that
the matter be referred to the Court of the Civil Judge within the limits of whose jurisdiction
the land in relation to which the award is made is situated.
(2) Any such application shall be made within six weeks from the date of the award,
and shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(3) The provisions of section 5, 12 and 14 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of
1963) shall apply to the computation of the time fixed for reference under sub-section 2.
(4) The Highway Authority or the officer authorized shall make the reference in such
a manner as may as prescribed.
Procedure and powers of the authorities empowered to decide references under
sections 35 and 44. - 36. (1) References under section 35 and 44 shall be deemed to be
proceedings within the meaning of section 141 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, (5 of
1908), and in the trial thereof, the authorities empowered to decide such references may
exercise all the power of Civil Court under that Code.
(2) The scope of the enquiry in a reference under sections 35 and 44 shall be restricted
to a consideration of the matters referred to the authorities mentioned in sub-section (1) in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
District Superintendent of Police to enforce surrender or remove any
encroachment.- 37. If the Highway Authority or any officer or servant is opposed or
impeded in taking possession of any land or in executing any work or in removing any
encroachment under this Act, the Highway Authority or officer or servant concerned shall
apply to the Superintendent of Police of such Police Officer as the State Government may
empower in this behalf and the Superintendent of Police or the officer so empowered shall
enforce the surrender, removal or execution, as the case may be.
Decision of authorities under sections 35 and 44 to be enforced as decrees of Civil
Court. -38. The decisions of the authorities empowered to decide references under section 35
and 44 shall be enforcible as a decree of a Civil Court.
Payment of compensation awarded.- 39. (i) On the determination of the
compensation by agreement under section 27, or
(ii) on making of an award under section 28,or
(iii) if a reference is made under section 35 against such an award, after the decision
of the authority under that section,
The Highway Authority shall make the payment of the compensation awarded to
person entitled thereto in accordance with the agreement, its award or the decision of the
authority empowered to decide reference under section 35, as the case may be. The
provisions of sections 31 to 34 (both inclusive) of the Land Acquisition Act 1894 (I of 1894)
shall mutatis mutandis apply to such payment.
Payment of adjustment.- 40. All payments due to be made to any person by way of
compensation by the Highway Authority under this Act, shall, as far as possible be made by
adjustment in such person’s account regarding betterment charges, if any, due from such
person under Chapter VI.

CHAPTER VI
LEVY OF BETTERMENT CHARGES
Notice to owners and person’s interested.-41. Where any work which the Highway
Authority is empowered to undertake by or under the provisions of this Act is undertaken, the
officer authorized by the State Government in this behalf shall give notice to the persons
known or believed to be the owners of or interested in the lands benefited by such work
requiring them to appear before him either personally or by an agent at a time and place
therein mentioned (such time not being earlier than thirty days from the date of the notice) to
state their objections, if any, to the imposition and recovery of betterment charges on such
lands;
Provided that no such notice shall be given unless the Deputy Commissioner with the
previous sanction of the State Government has declared that the value of such lands is likely
to increase or has increased by reason of construction of such work.
Inquiry and Order. - 42. On the date fixed under section 41 or on such other date to
which the inquiry may be adjourned, the officer authorized under section 41 shall, after
holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner and after hearing objections, if any, state by the
persons as required by notice under section 41, make an order. The order shall specify:-
(a) the lands benefited by the construction of the work;
(b) the increase in the value of such lands by the proposed construction;
(c) the amount of the betterment charges leviable on each of the said lands;
(d) The date from which such betterment charges shall be leviable;
Provided that no betterment charges shall be leviable in respect of any land-
(i) which is unsuitable for development as a building site; or
(ii) which is situated beyond a distance of one furlong from the middle of the highway
on either side.
Increase in value and betterment charges. – 43. The increase in value on account of
construction of such work shall be the amount by which the value of the land on the date of
completion of the proposed work is likely to exceed or has exceeded the value of the land on
the date of the commencement of the said work and the betterment charges shall be one half
of such increase in value.
Explanation: - For the purpose of this section the State Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify-
(a) the date of the commencement of the construction of any work,
(b) the date of completion of such work.
Reference against order of authorized officer under section 42- 44. (1) Any person
aggrieved by the order fixing the betterment charges may, by written application to the
officer authorized under section 41 require that the matter be referred to the officer exercising
the powers of a Civil Judge within the limits of whose jurisdiction the land is situated.
(2) Any such application shall be made within six weeks from the date on which the
order of the officer referred to in sub-section (1) was communicated to such person and shall
be in such form as may be prescribed.
(3) The provisions of section 5, 12 and 14 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1963 shall
apply to the computation of the time fixed for reference under sub-section (2).
(4) The officer authorized under section 41 shall make the reference in such manner
as may be prescribed.
Finality of order fixing betterment charges and of decision on reference. -45. The
order fixing betterment charges made under section 42, subject to a reference to the Authority
under section 44 and the decision of the Authority on reference under section 44, shall be
final.
Betterment charges to be first charge on land next to land revenue and house
tax. – 46. From the date specified in the order fixing the betterment charges as the date from
which such charges shall be leviable, or from such date as may be otherwise specified by the
Authority under section 44 as the date from which such charges shall be leviable, the
betterment charges recoverable in respect of any land shall, subject to prior payment of land
revenue and house tax if any, due to the State Government thereon be a first charge on the
land in respect of which such betterment charges are leviable.
Payment of betterment charges. – 47. The betterment charges shall be payable on
the date fixed under the rules made by the State Government under section 72;
Provided that the owner of the land on which such charges are imposed may execute
an agreement in favour of the State Government agreeing to pay the amount of such charges
by annual installments together with interest at such rate and within such period as may be
prescribed.
Relinquishment of or exchange of and in lieu of payment of betterment charge. –
48. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 47, the State Government may allow the
owner of the land on which betterment charges may be payable to relinquish the whole or any
part of the land or to deliver it in exchange in lieu of payment of the charges in favour of the
State Government on such conditions as may be prescribed;
Provided that no such relinquishment of exchange shall be permitted unless the land is
free from encumbrances.

CHAPTER VII
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS TO SECURE SAFETY OF TRAFFIC AND
PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO
HIGHWAYS

49. (1) Whenever the Highway Authority is of opinion that it is necessary for the
prevention of danger arising from obstruction of the view of person using any Highway,
especially at any bend or corner of the highway it may, save as otherwise provided in section
11, serve a notice upon the owner or occupier of land alongside or at the bend or corner of
such highway to alter within such time and in such manner as may be specified in the notice,
the height or character of any existing wall (not being a wall forming part of a permanent
structure) fence, hedge, tree, advertisement post, bill board or any other object thereon, so as
to cause it to conform with any requirements specified in the notice.
(2) If any person upon whom a notice has been served under sub-section (1), objects
to comply with any requirements of such notice, he may, within one month of its receipt,
send to the Highway Authority his objection in writing stating the grounds thereof.
(3) The Highway Authority shall within one month of receipt of the objection,
consider the grounds advanced and shall, by order in writing, either withdraw the notice or
amend or confirm it.
(4) If a person is aggrieved by an order issued by the Highway Authority under subsection (3), he may prefer an appeal within fifteen days from the date when such order was
communicated to him to the Deputy Commissioner whose decision in the matter shall be
final.
(5) If any person fails to comply with the notice served on him under sub-section (1)
as amend or confirmed as the case may be, under sub-section (3), the Highway Authority
may take action to alter the object causing obstruction of view at its own expense, and such
expenditure shall be recovered from such person in accordance with the provisions of section
25, without prejudice to any other action which may be taken against him.
Highway Authority to regulate traffic when highway declared unsafe. – 50. If at
any time it appears to the Highway Authority that any highway in its charge or any portion
thereof is or has been rendered unsafe for vehicular or pedestrian traffic by reason of damage
or otherwise, it may, subject to such rules as may be prescribed in this behalf close the
highway or the portion of it to all traffic or to any class of traffic, or regulate the number and
speed or weight of vehicles using the highway.
Prohibition of use of heavy vehicles on certain highway. – 51. Where the Highway
Authority is satisfied that any highway or a portion thereof, or any bridge, culvert or
causeway built on or across any highway, is not designed to carry vehicles of which the laden
weight exceeds such limit as may be fixed in this behalf, it may subject to such rules as may
be prescribed in that behalf, prohibit or restrict the plying of such vehicles on or over such
highway or such part of the highway or such bridge, culvert or causeway.
Procedure to be followed when Highway Authority desires permanently to close
any highway. - 52. (1) Where in exercise of the powers conferred on it by section 50 the
Highway Authority desires prior approval of the State Government give notice of its intention
so to do in the Official Gazette. The notification shall also be published in at least one
newspaper, which has circulation in the place in which the highway is situated.
(2) The notice shall indicate the alternative route if any which is proposed to be
provided or which may already be in existence, and shall also invite objections, if any, to the
proposal to be submitted within such time as may be specified.
(3) The Highway Authority shall finalise its proposal to close down any highway or
part of it after considering the objection if any, received within the specified time and shall
submit the final proposal to the State Government for the approval together with such
objections as may have been received against the proposal.
(4) The State Government may either approve the proposal with or without
modification, or reject it.
(5) When the State Government has approved the proposal it shall publish its orders in
Official Gazette.
(6) When the orders of the State Government have been published in the Official
Gazette, the Highway Authority shall arrange for further publicity to be given to the orders in
at least one newspaper which has circulation in the place in which such highway is situated
and the highway or part thereof shall then be closed.
(7) Whenever any highway or any part thereof has been so closed reasonable
compensation shall be paid to every person who was entitled, otherwise than as a mere
member of the public, to us such highway or part thereof as a means of access to or from his
property situated on such highway or part thereof and has suffered damage by such closure.
Consent of Highway Authority required to do certain acts on highway. – 53. (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other enactment for the time being in force but
subject to the provisions of section 73 no person other then the Highway Authority or any
person authorized by it shall construct or carry any cable, wire, pipe, drain, sewer or channel
of any kind through, across, under or over any highway, except with the permission in writing
of the Highway Authority.
(2) In giving its consent, the Highway Authority may impose such condition as it may
deem to be necessary and may also impose a rent or other charge for any land forming part of
the highway occupied by or applied to the proposed work.
(3) If any person constructs or carries out any work in contravention of sub-section
(1), the Highway Authority may arrange for the removal of such work and restoration of the
highway to its former condition in accordance with the provisions of section 23 as if the work
constituted an encroachment on the highway, and such expenses as the Highway Authority
may incur for this purpose, shall without prejudice to any other action that may be taken
against such person, be recovered from him in accordance with the procedure provided in
Prevention and rectification of damaged highway. – 54. (1) No person shall
willfully cause, or allow any vehicle or animal in his charge to cause any damage to any
highway.
(2) Where in contravention of sub-section (1) any damage has been caused to any
highway, the Highway Authority shall have the damage repaired and the expenses involved
shall, without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against the person responsible
for the contravention of sub-section (1), be recovered from him in accordance with the
procedure provided in section 25 in so far as that procedure is applicable.

CHAPTER VIII
PENALITITES
Disobedience of orders, instructions and refusal to give information, etc. –
55. Whoever willfully disobeys any direction lawfully given by any person or authority
empowered under this Act to give such direction, or obstructs any person or authority in the
discharge of any functions that such person or authority is required or empowered under this
Act to discharge, or being required by or under this Act, to supply any information, withholds
such information or gives information which he knows to be false or which he does not
believe to be true, shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to two
hundred rupees.
Contravention of restrictions relating to access or erecting any building, etc. –
56. Whoever erects, alters or extends any building, or makes any excavation, or constructs
any means of access to or from a highway or does any other work in contravention of the
provision of section 9, shall, on conviction, be punished, -
(a) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and
(b) with further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for each day after such
conviction during which the offending structure or work is not removed,
demolished or cleared and the site not restored to its original condition.
Unauthorised occupation of Highway. – 57. Whoever –
(a) occupies or makes any encroachment on any highway in contravention of the
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 21, or
(b) fails to comply with the notice served on him under sub-section (1) of section 23,
for no valid reason, shall on conviction, be punished, -
(i) for a first offence with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees.
(ii) for a subsequent offence in relation to the same encroachment with fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees plus a further fine not exceeding fifty
rupees per day on which such occupation of the highway or encroachment
continues.
Causing damage to Highways. – 58. Whoever in contravention of sub-section (1) of
damage to any highway, shall conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees.
General provision for punishment of offences. – 59. Whoever contravenes any
provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder shall, if no other penalty is
provided for the offence, no convictions, be punished, -
(a) for a first offence with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.
(b) for a subsequent offence with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.
Power to compound offences. – 60. Any offence committed under this Act may be
compounded by the Highway Authority and if any proceeding have been instituted against
any person in any criminal court; then on the terms of the compromise being carried out, the
composition shall be held to amount to an acquittal and in no case shall any further
proceeding to be taken against such person or any property of such person with reference to
the same facts.

CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS

Revision. – 61. The State Government may at any time call for and examine the
records relating to any order passed or proceeding taken under this Act by the Deputy
Commissioner or the Highway Authority or any officer subordinate to the Deputy
Commissioner or the Highway Authority for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality
or correctness of such order or proceeding and may pass such order in reference thereto as it
thinks fit;
Provided that no order shall be modified, annulled or reserved unless notice has been
served on the parties interested and opportunity given to them for being heard.
Powers and duties of police. – 62. Every Police Officer shall forthwith furnish
information to the nearest Highway Authority or the nearest officer subordinate to the
Highway Authority or any offence coming to his knowledge which has been committed
against this Act or any rule made thereunder and shall be bound to assist the Highway
Authority and its officers and servants in the exercise of their lawful authority.
Duties of village officials. – 63. Every village Gaonbura, village council member or
other village official by whatever name called shall forthwith inform the nearest Police
station or the nearest Highway Authority or any officer duly authorized by the Highway
Authority, whenever he becomes aware that any survey mark or any boundary mark of any
highway or any mark showing the building or control line determined in respect of a highway
has been destroyed, damaged, removed, displaced or otherwise tampered with or that any
damage to any highway or encroachment on any highway has been made.
Powers to utilize highway for other than road purposes. – 64. The Highway
Authority may utilize temporarily for other than road purposes land forming part of a
highway which is not immediately required for the passage of traffic.
Summary. - 65. Any person wrongfully occupying any land, -
(a) which is a part of a highway,
(b) the occupation of which contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, and the said
provisions do not provide for the eviction of such person, shall be summarily
evicted by the Deputy Commissioner in the prescribed manner on being required
to do so by the Highway Authority or any officer authorized in this behalf by the
State Government.
Inquiries. – 66. (1) The Highway Authority or the officer authorized by the State
Government in this behalf shall, if be desires to make any inquiry for the purposes of this
Act, make the inquiry in the prescribed manner.
(2) The Highway Authority or an officer authorized by the State Government or the
Highway Authority under this Act shall have the power to take the evidence on oath and to
summon any person whose attendance he considers necessary either to be examined as a
party or to give evidence as a witness or to produce documents for the purpose of the inquiry
under sub-section (1).
(3) Any person summoned under sub-section (2) shall be bound to attend either in
person or by an authorized agent as directed in the summons: -
Provided that exemptions under section 132 and 133 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, shall be applicable to requirement for attendance under this Act.
(4) Every person summoned under sub-section (2) either to be examined as a party or
to give evidence as witness shall be bound-
(i) to state the truth upon any subject respecting which he is examined or makes a
statement; or
(ii) to produce such documents as may be required.
(5) Any person summoned merely to produce a document shall be deemed to have
complied with the summons by causing the production of such documents instead of
attending personally to produce the same.
Registration Map made under section 8 not required. – 67. (1) Nothing in the
India Registration Act, 1908, shall be deemed to require the registration of any map made
under section 8.
(2) All such maps shall, for the purposes of sections 49 and 50 of the Indian
Registration Act, 1908, be deemed to have been and to be registered in accordance with the
provisions of that Act:
Provided that the maps shall be accessible to the public in the manner prescribed.
Certain persons to be public servants. – 68. the Highway Authority, the officers and
other persons authorized or appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Bar of jurisdiction. – 69. No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or
deal with any question which is by under this Act required to be settled, decide or dealt with
by Highway Authority, the Deputy Commissioner an officer or person authorized under this
Act, any Authority under section 35 or section 44 or the State Government.
Protection of persons acting in faith and limitation or suit or prosecution. – 70.
(1) No suit or prosecution or other legal proceeding shall be instituted against any public
servant or officer or person duly authorized under this Act in respect of anything in good faith
done or intended to be done under this Act, or the rules or orders made thereunder.
(2) No suit or prosecution shall be instituted against any public servant or officer or
person duly authorized under this Act in respect of anything done or intended to be done
under this Act, except with the previous sanction of the State Government.
Service of notice and bills. – 71. (1) Every notice or bill issued or prepared under this
Act, may be served or presented –
(a) by delivering or tendering it or sending it by registered post to the person to whom
it is addressed, or to his agent, or
(b) if such a person or his agent not found, then by leaving it at his usual or last
known place of abode or by delivering or tendering it to some adult male member
of his family or by causing it to be fixed on some conspicuous part of the building
or land, if any, to which it relates.
(2) Where a notice under this Act is required to be served upon the owner or occupier
of a building or land, it shall not be necessary to name the owner or occupier, and the service
thereof may be effected either :-
(a) by delivering or tendering the notice or sending it by registered post to the owner
or occupier or if there be more owners or occupiers than one, to any one of them,
or
(b) if no such owner or occupier is found, then by giving or tendering the notice to an
adult male member or servant of his family or by causing the notice to be fixed on
some conspicuous part of the building or land to which the same relates.
(3) Whenever the person to whom a notice or bill is to be served is a minor, service
upon his guardian or upon an adult male member or servant of his family shall be deemed to
be service upon the minor.
Powers to make rules. – 72. (1) The Stat Government may by notification in the
Official Gazette, and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out
all or any of the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality the foregoing power, the State
Government may make rules for all or any of the following matters: -
(a) the manner in which the notification may be published in the village and at the
headquarters of the circle under sub-section (2) of section 7;
(b) the other places at which copies of map may be open to inspection under section
8;
(c) the form of application and its contents under sub-section (2) of section 9;
(d) the other manner of publishing the notification under section 15;
(e) the conditions on which and the amount of rent or charge on payment of which
encroachments may be made on a highway;
(f) the manner in which a reference shall be made under section 35 or 44;
(g) fixation of the date on which the betterment charges shall be payable under
which such installments shall be paid under the proviso to the said section;
(h) the conditions on which any land may be relinquished or delivered in exchange in
favour of the State Government under section 48;
(i) rules subject to which any highway or portion of it may be closed to traffic or any
class of traffic or the number and speed or weight of vehicles using the highway
may be regulated under section 50;
(j) rules subject to which plying of vehicles may be prohibited under section 51;
(k) the prevention of obstruction of view of persons using highways and of
annoyance, danger or injury to the public;
(l) the prevention of obstruction, encroachment and nuisance on or near and of
damages to highways;
(m) the proper maintenance of boundary mark demarcating highway boundaries and
building and control lines;
(n) the prescription of various forms of applications required to be made and form of
notices and bills required to be served on persons, the charges to be made for
supply of copies of maps, and the rent or other charges to be imposed or levied
under the provisions of this Act;
(o) the general guidance of the Highway Authority in the discharge of its functions
under this Act;
(p) regulation or diversions of existing rights of access;
(q) the manner of holding an enquiry under section 65 or section 66;
(r) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.

(3) Every Rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before the Nagaland Legislative Assembly while it is in session for a total period of
seven days, which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the sessions immediately following,
the Nagaland Legislative Assembly agree in making any modification in the rule or the
Nagaland Legislative Assembly agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
or anything previously done under that rule.
Savings. – 73. Subject to the provisions of this section nothing in this Act shall affect
–
(a) the rights of any local authority to make any excavation for the purpose of laying,
making, altering, repairing or renewing any sewer, drain, water course or other
works; or
(b) the rights of any authority appointed under any law for the time being in force for
water, electricity, railway or trolley vehicles to erect any support or make any
excavation for purpose of laying, making, altering, repairing or renewing any
main, pipe, sluice, weir, electric line, duct, drain or other apparatus; or
(c) any land belonging to a Railway administration or belonging to or used by a
person holding a license or sanction for the generation, transformation or
distribution or electricity under the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, when such land is
held or used by the Railway administration, or such person, as the case may be,
for the purpose of its railway of for generation, transformation or distribution of
electricity, except in so far as they may consent thereto; or
(d) any land within the limits of cantonment or a port declared by or under any law
made by Parliament or existing law to be a major port; or
(e) any land within the jurisdiction of a local authority under the administration
control of the Central Government:
Provided that : -
(i) any restriction in force under section 9 as to construction, formation or laying
out of means of access to, or from, any road, shall without any such consent as
foresaid, extent to any such land as is specified in clause (c) in so far as the
restrictions relate to means of access over or under such land to, or from, land
other than land so specified; and
(ii) any consent required for the purpose of this section shall not be unreasonably
withheld and the question whether or the consent so required is unreasonably
withheld shall be determined by the State Government on the question shall be
final.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall affect any powers and duties of the telegraph
authority under the provision of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (18 of 1885).
(3) The authority or persons mentioned in sub-section (1) shall be liable to restore
the highway to its former condition on completion of any excavation or other works done
under the said sub-section and upon its failing to do so the Highway Authority may cause the
restoration to be made and recover from such authority or person the expenditure incurred by
it.
Provisions of this Act or rules prevail over inconsistent provisions in other
laws. – 74. Save as provided in section 72, the provision of this Act or rules made thereunder
in regard to any matter dealt with thereby shall prevail over the provisions of any other law
made by the State Legislature or any law which the State Legislature is competent to make or
to amend, in so far as such law is inconsistent with the said provisions or rules and such to
take extend of such inconsistency shall cease to apply or shall not apply to any such matter.
Building and control lines along National Highway.- 76. For the avoidance of
doubt it is hereby declared that nothing in this Act shall apply to highways which area or
have been declared by or under any law made by Parliament to be National Highways:
Provided that if any highway is declared to be a National Highway by or under
any law made by Parliament, it shall be lawful for the State Government to fix or not to fix
the building and control lines for different portions of the said highway under section 7 and
thereafter the provisions of this Act in so far as they apply to the restriction on buildings
between the highway boundary and the buildings line or between the building line and the
control line and other provisions relating to such building and control lines shall, mutates
mutants apply.

SCHEDULE

(See sections 28 (2) and 30)
Amendments to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).
Amendments of the section 23 of Act 1 of 1894: - 1. For section 23 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, the following shall be substituted, namely:
“23 Matters to be considered in determining compensation: In determining the
amount of compensation to be awarded for the land or any interest therein acquired under this
Act, the following matters shall be taken into consideration.
(1) the market value at the date of the publication of the declaration under section 15
of the Nagaland Highways Act, 1966;
(2) the use to which the land was put at the date of such declaration;
(3) the damage sustained by the person interested by reason of the taking of any
standing crops or trees which may be on the land at the time when the possession
was taken from him;
(4) the damage (if any) sustained by the person interested at the time of possession
being taken from him by reason of severing such land from his other land;
(5) the damage (if any) sustained by the person interested at the time of the possession
being taken from him of the land by reason of the acquisition injurious affecting
his other property, movable or immovable in any other manner or his earnings;
(6) if in consequence of the acquisition of the land, the person interested is compelled
to change his residence, or place of business, the reasonable expenses, if any,
incidental to such change.”
Amendment of section 24 of Act 1 of 1894. – 2. For section 24 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, the following shall be substituted, namely; -
“Matters to be neglected in determining compensation. – 24. But the Court shall
not take into consideration the following matters; -
(1) the degree of urgency which has led to the acquisition;
(2) any disinclination of the person interested to part with the land acquired;
(3) any damage sustained by him which, if caused by private person would not
render such person liable to a suit;
(4) any damage which is likely to be caused to the land acquired after the date of
the publication of the declaration under section 15 of the Nagaland Highways Act, 1966 by or
in consequence of the use of which it will put;
(5) any increase to the value of the land acquired likely to accrue from the use to
which it will be put when acquired;
(6) any increase to the value of the land of the person interested likely to accrue
from the use of which the land acquired will be put;
(7) any outlay or improvements on, or for disposal of the land acquired
commenced, made or effect without the sanctioned of the Highway Authority after the date of
the publication of the declaration under section 15 of the Nagaland Highways Act, 1966;
(8) the special suitability or adaptability of the land for any purpose if the at
purpose is a purpose to which it could be applied in pursuance of any law or for which there
is no market apart from the special needs of the Highway Authority;
(9) any increase in the value of the land by reason of the use thereof or any
premises thereon in manner which could be restrained by any court, or is contrary to law or is
detrimental to the health of the inmates of the premises or to the public health”.