An act to provide for the levy of a t ax on professions, trades, callings and
employments in Madhya Pradesh.
Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legisl ature in the Forty-Sixth year of the
Republic of India as follows :
Sec. 1 : Short title, extent and commencement
(1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniyam, 1995.
(2) It extends to the whole of Madhya Pradesh.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1995.
Sec. 2 : Definitions
In this Act unless the context otherwise requires :
(a) Profession Tax Appellate Authority means an officer of the rank of an
Appellate Deputy Commissioner or Additional Appellate Deputy Commissioner of
Commercial Tax appointed under Section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Vanijyik Kar
Adhiniyam, 1994 (No. 5 of 1995) as may, by notification, be authorised by the State Government to perform such functions of the Profession Tax Appellate Authority
under this Act as may be specified in the said notification;
(b) 2Profession Tax Assessing Authority means such officer not below the rank of
an Assistant Commercial Tax Officer appointed under Section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Vanijyik Kar Adhiniyam, 1994 (No. 5 of 1995), as may, by Notification, be
authorised by the State Government to pe rform such functions of the Profession Tax
Assessing Authority under this Act as may be specified in the said notification.
(c) Employee means a person employed on [salary or wage] and includes -
(i) A Government servant receiving pay from the revenues of the Central
Government or any State Government or the Railway Fund;
(ii) A person in the service of a body whether incorporated or not, which is owned or controlled by the Central Government or any State Government
where the body operates in any part of the State, even through its
headquarters may be outside the State;
(iii) A person engaged in any employment of an employer not covered by items (i) and (ii) above;

Received the assent of the Governor on the 10.5.95; Assent first published in Madhya Pradesh
Rajpatra dt. 16.5.95.
Now in view of the Noti. No. 58, dt. 2.6.99 the Professional Tax assessment of a dealer shall be
made by the assessing authority ma king his assessment under MPCT Act.
In the Act, the word ‘salary’ wherever occu rred has been substituted by the words ‘salary or
PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX ACT, 1995 307
(d) Employer in relation to an employee earning any [salary or w age] on regular
basis under him means the person or the officer w ho is responsible for disbursem ent
of such [salary or w age] and includes the h ead of the office or an establishm ent as
well as the m anager or agent of the em ployer;
(e) Income means :
(i) Profits and gains;
(ii) dividends and interests;
(iii) the value of any benefit or perquisite , whether convertible into m oney or
not, obtained from a com pany either by a director or a person who has a
substantial interest in the com pany, and any sum paid by any such com pany
in respect of any obligations, w hich, but for such pay ment w ould have been
payable by the director or other pers on aforesaid, accruing or arising to a
person within the State from any profession, trade or calling other than
agriculture.
(f) Person means any person w ho is engaged in any profession, trade, calling or
employment in the State of Madhy a Pradesh and includes a H indu undivided fam ily,
firm, com pany, corporation or other corporate body , any society , club or association
so engaged but does not include any person w ho earns [salary or w age] on casual
basis;
(g) Previous year means tw elve m onths expiring on 31st March immediately
preceding the year in respect of which assessm ent is to be m ade;
[(h) Salary or Wages includes pay , dearness allow ance and all other rem unerations
including allowances received by any person on a regular basis whether payable in
cash or kind and also includes perquisites and profits in lieu of salary as defined in
in any form and on any account, gratuity and pension]
(i) Schedule means the Schedule appended to this A ct;
(j) Tax means tax pay able under this A ct;
(k) Year means the financial year.
Sec. 3 : Levy and collection of tax
(1) Subject to the provisions of Article 276 of the Constitution of India, and of this
Act there shall be levied and collected tax on professions, trades, callings and
employments.
(2) Every person who carries on a trade e ither him self or by an agent or
representative or who follow s a profession or calling other than agriculture or w ho is
in em ployment either w holly or in part in Madhy a Pradesh and w ho falls under one or
the other classes specified in colum n (2) of the Schedule shall, on the basis specified

Clause (h) substituted by Professional Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999 w. e.f. 1.5.99. During
16.4.96 to 30.4.99 clause (h) read as under :
(h) “Salary ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under Section 17 of the Income
Tax Act, 1961 (No. 43 of 1961) after deductions as permissible under Section 16 of that Act
except tax pay able under this Act;
Prior to 16.4.96 the provisions of clause (h ) were similar to the present provisions.

X LAWS IN M.P.
in the Schedule in respect thereto be liable to pay tax at the rate m entioned against the
class of such persons in colum n (3) of the said Schedule :
Provided that notw ithstanding any thing contained in the Schedule, w here a
person is covered by more than one entry of the Schedule, tax under this A ct shall be
payable by such person at the highest rate of tax specified in respect of such entries.
(3) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub-section (2), any person falling in any
of the classes specified in colum n (2) ag ainst serial num ber 2 of the Schedule shall
have the right to opt, in the prescribed m anner, to pay tax on the annual incom e as
specified in colum n (2) against serial N o.1 in lieu of the tax pay able by him, and on
exercising the option such person shall be liable to pay tax at the rate specified in
colum n (3) against the category specified in colum n (2) against serial num ber 1
applicable to him, and for that purpose reference to [salary or w age] in serial N o. 1
shall be construed as a reference to the incom e of such person.
(4) Every person who opts under sub-section (3) for pay ment of tax under entry at
serial No. 1 of the Schedule shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, pay for each
financial year a tax at the rate specified in Serial No.1 of the Schedule if his incom e
during the previous y ear ex ceeds forty thousand rupees.
(5) Any person w ho is in em ployment in Madhy a Pradesh shall be deem ed to be in
employment even though he m ay be absent therefrom on leave or otherw ise.
Sec. 4 : Employer’s liability to deduct and pay tax on behalf of employees
(1) The tax payable under this A ct by any person earning a [salary or w age] shall be
deducted m onthly in the prescribed m anner by his em ployer from the [salary or wage]
payable to such person before such [salary or w age] is paid to him and such employer
shall, irrespective of whether such deduction has been m ade or not, w hen the [salary
or wage] is paid to such person, be liable to pay tax on behalf of all such persons :
Provided that if the em ployer is an officer of the Central G overnm ent or a State
Governm ent, such em ployer shall discharge the said liability in such m anner, as m ay
be prescribed.
(2) When any person earning a [salary or w age] -
(a) is also covered by one or m ore entries other than entry 1 of the Schedule and
the rate of tax in any such other entry is m ore than the rate of tax under
entry 1 of the said Schedule,
(b) is sim ultaneously in em ployment of m ore than one em ployer,
and such person furnishes to his employer a certificate in the prescribed Form
declaring that he has been registered under sub-section (2) of Section 8 and shall pay
the tax him self, then the em ployer or em ployers of such person shall not deduct the
tax from the [salary or w age] pay able to such person and such employer or
employers, as the case m ay be, shall not be liable to pay tax on behalf of such person :
Provided that such person m ay opt to have the am ount of tax deducted by the
employer or em ployers from his [salar y or w age] and thereupon the am ount so
deducted shall stand adjusted tow ards the tax pay able by such person for the y ear.
Sec. 5 : Computation of Income
For the purpose of com puting the incom e of a person liable to pay tax in accordance
with provisions of sub-section (3) and (4) of Section 3 the follow ing deductions shall
be m ade from the gross incom e nam ely :

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX ACT, 1995 309
(i) [Salary or w age] of other persons engaged by him in the profession or
calling;
(ii) Rent in respect of the building to house the business as w ell as rent on
account of machinery , furniture and other sim ilar goods taken on lease or
hire;
(iii) all kinds of taxes;
(iv) repairs and renew als of im movable property let out on rent subject to a
maximum of 6.25 per cent of the annual rental value;
(v) interest on borrowed capital;
(vi) repairs of the building and rents of the prem ises where the business is carried
on;
(vii) electric charges in respect of business prem ises where the business is carried
on;
(viii) such other deductions as m ay be prescribed.
Sec. 6 : Power to exempt
Where the State G overnm ent is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to
do, either in the public interest or having regard to the peculiar circum stances of any
case, it may by notification and subject to su ch conditions, if any, as it m ay specify in
the notification, exem pt any class of persons or any employer or class of employers
from the operation of all or any of the provi sions of this A ct for such period as m ay
be specified in the notification.
Sec. 7 : Taxing A uthority
(1) The administration of the Act shall vest in the Com missioner of Com mercial Tax
appointed under Section 3 of the Madhy a Pradesh V anijyik K ar Adhiniy am, 1994
(No. 5 of 1995) who shall for the purpose of this A ct be designated as Com missioner
Profession Tax.
(2) The Com missioner Profession Tax shall exercise the pow ers of general
superintendence and control over the authorities appointed under this Act.
(3) The Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority and the Profession Tax Appellate
Authority shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as m ay be conferred or
imposed upon them by or under this A ct.
Sec. 8 : R egistration
(1) Every employer, other than any officer of the Central G overnm ent, Railw ays or
the State G overnm ent, liable to pay tax under Section 4 shall obtain a certificate of
registration from the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority in such m anner and form as
may be prescribed.
(2) Every person liable to pay tax under this A ct, other than a person earning [salary
or wage] in respect of w hom the tax is pay able by the em ployer but including a
person w ho in addition to earning a [salary or wage] is also carry ing on a trade,
profession or calling other than agriculture or w ho is sim ultaneously in em ployment
of m ore than one em ployer, shall obtain a certificate of registration from the
Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority in such m anner and form as m ay be prescribed.
(3) Every employer or person required to obtain a certificate of registration under
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall within thirty days of his becom ing liable to
pay tax under this A ct apply for the certificate of registration to the Profession Tax

X LAWS IN M.P.
Assessing A uthority in the prescribed form and that authority shall, after such enquiry
as it considers necessary, within sixty days of the receipt of the application, if the
application is in order, grant the certificate of registration.
(4) Where an em ployer or person liable to registration has w ilfully failed to apply
for such certificate within the tim e specified in sub-section (3), the Procession Tax
Assessing Authority may, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard,
impose penalty not exceeding rupees twenty for each day of delay subject to a
maximum of rupees tw o thousand five hundred.
(5) Where an employer or a person liable to registration has given false inform ation
in any application subm itted under this Section, the Profession Tax Assessing
Authority may after giving him a reasona ble opportunity of being heard im pose a
penalty not exceeding rupees five hundred.
Sec. 9 : Returns to be furnished by employers
(1) Every employer registered under this Act shall furnish returns to the Profession
Tax A ssessing A uthority in such Form , for such period and by such date as may be
prescribed, show ing therein th e [salary or wage] paid by him and the am ount of tax
deducted by him in respect thereof.
(2) Every such return shall be accom panied by a treasury challan in proof of paym ent
of full amount of tax due according to the re turn and a return without such proof of
payment shall not be deem ed to have been duly filed.
(3) Where an em ployer has w ithout reasonable cause failed to file such return within
the prescribed time, the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority may, after giving him a
reasonable opportunity of being heard, impose upon him a penalty not exceeding
rupees twenty for each day of delay.
(4) The State Governm ent m ay, subject to such conditions as m ay be specified
exem pt any employer or class of em ployers from furnishing returns.
Sec. 10 : Returns to be furnis hed by other registered persons
(1) Every person referred to in sub-section (2 ) of Section 8 shall, by the 30th June in
each financial year file before the Prof ession Tax Assessing Authority a correct and
complete return in such Form and containi ng such particulars as m ay be prescribed
setting forth his incom e in the previous y ear :
Provided that the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority may, for sufficient cause to
be recorded in writing, extend the date for filing the return :
Provided further that w here such person derives incom e from any profession,
trade or calling other than agriculture at places located within the territorial
jurisdiction of m ore than one Profession Tax A ssessing Authority , he shall file the
return before such Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority having jurisdiction over the
place where he norm ally resides.
(2) The State Governm ent may subject to such conditions as m ay be specified,
exem pt any class of persons from filing a return.
(3) Every such return shall be accom panied by a treasury challan in proof of paym ent
of full amount of tax due according to the re turn and a return without such proof of
payment shall not be deem ed to have been duly filed.
(4) Where a person specified in sub-section (1) has w ithout reasonable cause failed
to file such return within the tim e speci fied in sub-section (1) the Profession Tax

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX ACT, 1995 311
Assessing Authority may, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard,
impose upon him a penalty not exceeding rupees five for each day of delay subject to
a maximum of rupees five hundred.
Sec. 11 : A ssessment of tax
(1) The amount of tax due from an em ployer or person under this A ct shall be
assessed separately for each year :
Provided that w here such em ployer or person fails to furnish return by the
prescribed date or know ingly furnishes inco mplete or incorrect return for any period
of any year, he m ay be assessed to tax for such period.
(2) If the Profession Tax Assessing Authority is satisfied that the return filed by an
employer or person is correct and com plete, it shall by order in w riting assess the
employer or person and determ ine the tax pay able by him on the basis of such return.
(3) (a) If the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority is not satisfied that the return filed
by an em ployer or person is correct and complete, it shall serve upon the em ployer or
person a notice in the prescribed Form requiring him on a date specified in the notice
to attend in person or through an author ised representative and to produce accounts
and papers in support of the return.
(b) The Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority shall, on the date specified in the
notice or as soon as m ay be afterwards, on exam ination of accounts and papers, assess
the am ount of tax pay able by the em ployer or person.
(c) If the em ployer or person fails to com ply with the term s of the notice or if in
the opinion of the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority the accounts and papers are
incorrect or incom plete or unreliable, the sa id authority shall, after such enquiry as it
deem s fit, or otherw ise assess the tax due to the best of its judgem ent.
(4) If an employer or person has failed to get him self registered or being registered
has failed to file return, the Profession Tax A ssessing Authority shall, after giving the
employer or person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after holding such
enquiry as it deem s fit or otherw ise, pass an order assessing the am ount of tax to the
best of its judgem ent.
Sec. 12 : Payment of tax
(1) The tax or penalty or any other am ount pay able under this A ct shall be paid in the
prescribed m anner.
(2) The amount of tax deducted by an em ployer from the [salary or w age] of his
employees shall be paid by treasury challan within ten day s of the end of the m onth
for w hich the deduction has been m ade.
(3) The amount of tax due from persons other than em ployers shall be paid for every
year :
(a) in respect of a person registered before the
commencem ent of a year or registered on or
before 31st A ugust of a y ear. Before 30th Septem ber of
the year.
(b) in respect of a person w ho is registered after 31st
August of a y ear. Within thirty days of the
date of registration.
Sec. 13 : Penalty for non payment of tax

X LAWS IN M.P.
If a em ployer or person fails w ithout reasonable cause, to m ake pay ment of any
amount of tax within the specified tim e or the date as specified in the notice of
demand, the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority may, after giving him a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, im pose upon him a penalty equal to tw o per cent per
month of the am ount of tax due subject to a maximum of tw o-third of the am ount of
tax due.
Sec. 14 : Notice of demand
(1) Where any tax or penalty is pay able in consequence of any order passed under or
in pursuance of the provisions of this Act the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority
shall serve on the person concerned a notice of dem and in the prescribed Form
specify ing the am ount so pay able.
(2) The am ount of tax or penalty as specified in such notice shall be paid by such
date as may be specified therein and where no date is specified, it shall be paid within
thirty days from the service of the notice of dem and.
Sec. 15 : Recovery as arrears of land revenue
Any tax or penalty or part thereof rem aining unpaid after due date in accordance with
the provisions of Section 14, shall be r ecoverable as an arrear of land revenue.
Sec. 16 : Assessment or re-assessment of tax on employers and persons escaping
assessment
(1) If for any reason, any employer or pers on liable to pay tax under the provisions of
this Act has not been assessed to tax or has been under assessed to tax for any year,
the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority may, at any time within three years next
follow ing the y ear in respect of w hich such tax has not been assessed or has been
under assessed proceed to assess or re-assess the tax pay able by such em ployer or
person in respect of that year.
(2) The assessm ent or re-assessm ent under sub-section (1) as the case m ay be, shall
be com pleted within two years from the date of initiation of such proceedings.
Sec. 17 : A ppeal
(1) Any person or em ployer aggrieved by any order m ade under Sections 8, 9, 10, 11,
13, and 16 m ay appeal against such order to the Profession Tax A ppellate A uthority .
(2) No appeal shall be entertained after the expiry of thirty days from the date of
receipt of dem and notice or receipt of the order.
(3) No appeal shall be entertained, unless the am ount of tax or penalty in respect of
which the appeal is being preferred has been paid in full.
(4) The Profession Tax A ppellate A uthority in disposing of an appeal m ay :
(i) confirm , annul, reduce, enhance or otherw ise m odify the assessm ent or
penalty ; or
(ii) set aside the assessm ent or penalty and direct the Profession Tax A ssessing
Authority which m ade the assessm ent or im posed the penalty , to pass a fresh
order after further enquiry .
(5) No order under this Section shall be passed w ithout giving the appellant or his
representative a reasonable oppor tunity of being heard.
Sec. 18 : R evision
(1) The Com missioner Profession Tax m ay, on his ow n motion revise any order

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX ACT, 1995 313
passed by any authority under this A ct :
Provided that no order shall be revised by the Com missioner Profession Tax
under this sub-section after the expiry of three y ears from the date of passing of the
impugned order.
(2) No order under this Section shall be passed w ithout giving the assessee a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(3) The Com missioner Profession Tax m ay delegate his pow er under sub-section (1)
to the Additional Com missioner, Com mercial Tax appointed under Section 3 of the
Madhy a Pradesh V anijyik Kar Adhiniy am, 1994 (N o. 5 of 1995).
Sec. 19 : Accounts
(1) Every employer liable to pay tax under this Act shall maintain correct particulars
of the em ployees em ployed under him and co rrect accounts in respect of [salary or
wage] paid to such em ployees.
(2) The registers or docum ents and accounts re lating to the particulars of em ployees
and [salary or wage] disbursed to them maintained by the em ployer shall be open to
inspection by the Com missioner Profession Tax.
Sec. 20 : Production and inspection of accounts and documents and search of
premises
(1) The Com missioner Profession Tax m ay inspect and search any prem ises, where
any profession, trade, calling or em ployment liable to tax under this Act is carried on
or is suspected to be carried on and m ay cause production and exam ination of books,
registers, accounts or docum ents relating thereto and m ay seize such books, registers,
accounts or docum ents as m ay be necessary :
Provided that if the Com missioner Profession Tax rem oves from the said
prem ises any books, registers, accounts or docum ents, he shall give to the person
incharge of the place a receipt describing the books, registers, accounts or docum ents
so removed by him and retain the sam e only for so long as m ay be necessary for the
purposes of exam ination thereof or prosecution.
(2) The Com missioner Profession Tax m ay, subject to such restrictions and
conditions as m ay be prescribed, delegate his pow ers under sub-section (1) to any
officer of and above the rank of Com mercial Tax Inspector appointed under Section 3
of the Madhy a Pradesh V anijyik Kar Adhiniy am, 1994 (N o. 5 of 1995).
Sec. 21 : Refunds
(1) If the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority , is satisfied that the amount of tax or
penalty paid by an em ployer or person for any year exceeds the am ount to which he
has been assessed under this A ct for that y ear, it shall cause a refund to be m ade in
cash of such am ount in the m anner prescribed, found to have been paid in excess.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-s ection (1) the am ount of refund shall be
adjusted in the prescribed m anner against any arrears of tax, penalty or any other
amount due under this A ct.
Sec. 22 : Power under Code of Civil Procedure
The Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority , the Profession Tax A ppellate A uthority and
the authority exercising pow ers under Section 18 shall for the purposes of this A ct,
have the sam e pow ers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure,

X LAWS IN M.P.
(V of 1908) w hile try ing a suit, in respect of follow ing m atters, nam ely :
(a) enforcing the attendance of and exam ining any person on oath or affirm ation;
(b) compelling the production of any docum ent; and
(c) passing such interim orders as m ay be necessary in the ends of justice;
and any proceeding before such authority under this Act, shall be deem ed to be a
judicial proceeding within the m eaning of Section 193 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
(XLV of 1860) and also for the purpos e of Section 196 of the said Code.
Sec. 23 : Offences
(1) Any employer or person who, without sufficient cause, fails to com ply with any
of the provisions of this A ct or the rule s fram ed thereunder shall, on conviction be
punished with fine not exceeding two thous and five hundred rupees and when the
offence is a continuing one, with fine not exceeding twenty five rupees per day during
the period of continuance of the offence.
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except
with the previous sanction of such aut hority as m ay be prescribed and no Court
inferior to that of a Magistrate of th e first class shall try any such offence.
Sec. 24 : Offences by companies
(1) Where an offence under this Act has been com mitted by a com pany, every person
who at the time the offence was com mitted was in charge of and was responsible to
the com pany for the conduct of the business of the com pany, as w ell as the company,
shall be deem ed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly :
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishm ent, if he proves that the offence was com mitted without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) w here any offence under
this Act has been com mitted by a com pany and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of any Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer of the company, such
Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer shall be deem ed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly .
Explanation - For the purpose of this Section -
(a) Compa ny means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) Director in relation to a firm , means a partner of the firm .
Sec. 25 : Power to compound offences
(1) Subject to such conditions as m ay be prescribed, the Profession Tax A ssessing
Authority , may either before or after th e institution of proceedings under this Act
perm it any employer or person charged w ith an offence under this A ct to com pound
the offence on pay ment of such sum not exceeding two thousand five hundred rupees,
as the assessing authority may determ ine.
(2) On payment of such sum as m ay be determ ined by the Profession Tax Assessing
Authority , under sub-section (1), the accused em ployer or person shall be discharged

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX ACT, 1995 315
and no further proceeding shall be taken against him in respect of the said offence.
Sec. 26 : Bar of prosecution where penalty imposed
No prosecution for contravention of any provi sions of this Act shall be instituted in
respect of the sam e facts in respect of w hich a penalty has been imposed under this
Act or the rules fram ed thereunder.
Sec. 27 : Protection against su its or other proceedings
(1) No suit shall lie in any Civil Court to set aside or modify and assessm ent made or
order passed under the provisions of this A ct.
(2) No prosecution, suit or other proceedings shall lie against any officer or authority
or any employer for any thing done or intended to be done in good faith under this A ct
or the rules m ade thereunder.
Sec. 28 : Power to make rules
(1) The State G overnm ent may make rules for carry ing out the purposes of this A ct.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules m ay provide for all or any of the following m atters :
(a) (i) the m anner in w hich tax shall be deducted by an em ployer under Section 4
from the [salary or w age] of his em ployees;
(ii) the m anner in which liability to deduct tax on behalf of em ployees shall be
discharged, where the em ployer is an o fficer of the Central G overnm ent or a
State G overnm ent, under Section 4;
(b) the m anner and Form in w hich certificate of registration shall be obtained under
sub-section (1) and (2) of Section 8;
(c) the Form in which, the period for which and the date by which returns shall be
furnished by employers under Section 9;
(d) the Form in w hich return shall be furnished under sub-section (1) of Section 10;
(e) the Form in w hich notice shall be served on an em ployer and person under
(f) the manner in which tax, penalty or any other am ount pay able under the A ct shall
be paid;
(g) the Form of notice to be served or issued under Section 14 or Section 16,
respectively;
(h) the manner in which an appeal shall be preferred under sub-section (1) of Section
17;
(i) restrictions and conditions subject to w hich the Com missioner Profession Tax
may delegate his pow ers under sub-section (2) of Section 20;
(j) the m anner in w hich refund shall be m ade or adjusted under Section 21;
(k) the authority for sanctioning prosecution under Section 23;
(l) the conditions subject to w hich offences m ay be com pounded under Section 25;
(m) all m atters w hich are expressly required to be prescribed under this A ct.
(3) All rules m ade under this A ct shall be laid on the table of the legislative
assem bly.
_______________

X LAWS IN M.P.
SCHEDULE
(See Section 3)
Schedule of Rates of Tax on Professi ons, Trades, Callings and Employments
S.
No. Class of persons Rate of tax per annum
(1) (2) (3)
1{1. Persons i n employment whose annual salary or wage -
(i) does not exceed Rs. 40,000 Nil
(ii) exceeds Rs. 40,000 but does not exceed Rs.
50,000 Rs. 360 (R s. 30 per m onth)
(iii) exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed Rs.
60,000 Rs. 720 (R s. 60 per m onth)
(iv) exceeds Rs. 60,000 but does not exceed Rs.
80,000 Rs. 1080 (R s. 90 per m onth)
[(v) exceeds Rs. 80,000 but does not exceed Rs.
1,00,000 Rs. 1800 (R s. 150 per m onth)
(vi) exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 but does not exceed
R150000Rs. 2100 (R s. 175 per m onth)

Sr. No. 1 and entries relating thereto subs tituted by Professional Tax (Am endment) Act, 1999
1. Persons in employ ment whose annual salary
(i) Does not exceed rupees 40,000 Nil
(ii) Exceeds rupees 40,000 but does not exceed rupees 50,000 Rs. 500
(iii) Exceeds rupees 50,000 but does not exceed rupees 60,000 Rs. 750
(iv) Exceeds rupees 60,000 Rs. 1000
Explanation - For the purpos es of this entry where a pers on ceas es to be in employment before
the end of any year his liability to pay the tax for that period shall be proportionately reduced.
Clause (v) to (vii) and entries relating thereto substituted by Professional Tax (Amendment)
(v) exceeds Rs. 80,000 but does not exceed Rs.
1,00,000 Rs. 1200 (R s. 100 per m onth)
(vi) exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 but does not exceed
Rs. 1,50,000 Rs. 1440 (R s. 120 per m onth)
(vii) exceeds Rs. 1,50,000 but does not exceed
Rs. 2,00,000 Rs. 1800 (R s. 150 per m onth)
(viii) exceeds Rs. 2,00,000 but does not exceed
Rs. 2,50,000 Rs. 2160 (R s. 180 per m onth)
(ix) exceeds Rs. 2,50,000 but does not exceed
Rs. 3,00,000 Rs. 2280 (R s. 190 per m onth)
(x) exceeds Rs. 3,00,000 Rs. 2400 (Rs. 200 per m onth)

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX ACT, 1995 317
Rs. 1,50,000
(vii) exceeds Rs. 1,50,000 Rs. 2500 (Rs. 208 per m onth
for el even m onths and R s.
for t welth month)]
Explanati on - For the purpose of this entry where a person ceases to be in em ploym ent
before the end of any year lia bility to pay the tax for that period shall be proportionately
reduced.}
2. Where the standing in professi on or cal ling of :
(a) Legal practitioners including solicitors and notary public,
(b) Medical Practitio ners including Med ical co nsultants and dentists,
(c) Techni cal and Professi onal consul tants including Archi tects, Engi neers, R .C.C.
consul tants, Pl umbers, Tax C onsul tants, Chartered Account ants, Act uaries and
Managem ent Consul tants,
(d) Chief Agents, Principal Agents, Special Ag ents, Insurance Agents , Surveyors or Loss
Assessors Li cenced under t he Insurance Act , 1938 (4 of 1938).
(e) All contractors,
(f) Commission Agent s, Dal als and B rokers ot her than Est ate workers,
[(i) less th an two years Nil
(ii) two years or m ore but less than five years Rs. 1000
(iii) five years or m ore but less than ten years Rs. 1500
(iv) ten years or m ore Rs. 2500]
(i) Members of Associ ations recogni sed under t he Forward C ontracts
(Regulation) Act , 1952 (74 of 1952) Rs. 2500
(ii) Mem bers of stock exchanges recognised under the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act , 1956 (42 of 1956) Rs. 2500
(iii) Estate ag ents and brokers :

Clause (A), (B) and (C) of Sr. No. 2 and entrie s relating thereto substituted by clause (i) to (iv)
(B) & (C) read as under :
(A) In a place having a population of less than 50,000 is :
(i) less than five y ears Nil
(ii) five y ears or more but less than ten y ears Rs. 200
(iii) ten y ears or m ore but less than fifteen y ears Rs. 400
(iv) fifteen y ears or more Rs. 600
(B) In a place having a population of 50,000 and above but less than 1,00,000 is :
(i) less than five y ears Nil
(ii) five y ears or more but less than ten y ears Rs. 600
(iii) ten y ears or m ore but less than fifteen y ears Rs. 800
(iv) fifteen y ears or more Rs. 1000
(C) In a place having a population of 1,00,000 or m ore is,
(i) less than five y ears Nil
(ii) five y ears or more but less than ten y ears Rs. 1000
(iii) ten y ears or m ore but less than fifteen y ears Rs. 1500
(iv) fifteen y ears or more Rs. 2500

X LAWS IN M.P.
(a) in a place having a popula tion of less than 50,000 Rs. 1000
(b) in a place having a popula tion of 50,000 but less than
1,00,000 Rs. 1500
(c) in a place having a populati on of 1,00,000 and above Rs. 2500
(iv) Whole time Directors (ot her than those nom inated by Governm ent)
of companies registered under t he Companies Act , 1956 (1 of
1956) Rs. 2500
(v) Remisiers recogni sed by stock exchange Rs. 2500
(vi) All liquor licencees Rs. 2500
(vii) Employers of t heaters as defi ned i n the Madhya Pradesh Shops and
Establishments Act, 1958 (25 of 1958) Rs. 2500
(viii) (a) Own ers o f oil pumps with serv ice statio ns and where an y such
oil pum ps is leased, the lessee thereof Rs. 2500
(b) Owners of oi l pum ps wi thout servi ce st ations and where any
such pum p is leased, the lessee thereof Rs. 1500
(c) Owners of service stations and where any service station is
leased, the lessee thereof Rs. 1500
(ix) Employers of residential hotels as defi ned i n the Madhya Pradesh
Shops and Est ablishments Act, 1958 (25 of 1958)
(a) having less than twenty beds Rs. 1000
(b) having twenty beds or m ore but not more than fifty beds Rs. 1500
(c) having m ore than fifty beds Rs. 2500
(x) Companies registered under t he Companies Act , 1956 (1 of 1956)
and engaged i n any professi on, trade or cal ling Rs. 2500
(xi) Individuals or instituti ons conducting chit funds Rs. 2500
(xii) Banking C ompanies as defi ned i n the Banking Regulation Act,
(10 of 1949) Rs. 2500
(xiii) Co-operative Societies registered or deem ed to be registered under
the Madhya Pradesh C o-operat ive Soci eties Act , 1960 (17 of 1961)
(a) State level soci eties engaged i n any professi on, t rade or
callin g Rs. 1000
(b) District level soci eties engaged i n any professi on, t rade or
callin g Rs. 800
(c) Co-operative sugar factories and co-operative sugar m ills Rs. 2500
(xiv) [Owners of video parlours or vi deo l ibraries or bot h and where any
video parlour or vi deo l ibrary or bot h are l eased, t he lessee t hereof,
or owners of beaut y parl ours, cabl e operat ors, film distributors,
persons ow.i ng/runni ng STD/ ISD boot hs ot her than those owned or

parlour or video library or both are leased, the lessee thereof’ by Professional Tax

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX ACT, 1995 319
run by Governm ent or by phy sically handi capped persons, or
persons owi ng/runni ng m arriage hal ls] :
(a) in a place having a popula tion of less than 50,000 Rs. 1000
(b) in a place having a popula tion of 50,000 and above but less
than 1,00,000 Rs. 1500
(c) in a place having a popula tion of 1,00,000 and above Rs. 2500
(xv) Money lenders registered under t he M adhya Pradesh M oney
Lenders Act , 1934 (13 of 1934) :
(a) in a place having a popula tion of less than 50,000 Rs. 1000
(b) in a place having a populati on of 50,000 and above but less
than 1,00,000 Rs. 1500
(c) in a place having a populati on of 1,00,000 and above Rs. 2500
4. Employers of est ablishments as defi ned i n the Madhya Pradesh
Shops and Est ablishments Act, 1958 (25 of 1958) excluding those
specified elsewhere in the Schedule :
(i) Where there are not m ore than five em ployees Nil
(ii) Where more than five but not m ore than ten em ployees are
employed Rs. 1000
(iii) Where m ore than ten but not more than fifteen employees are
employed Rs. 1500
(iv) Where m ore than fifteen em ployees are em ployed Rs. 2500
5. [(i) Firms (whet her regi stered or not under t he Indi an Part nershi p
Act), excl uding firms covered i n any other ent ry of this Schedul e;
(ii) Hindu Undi vided Fam ily;
which are engaged i n any professi on, trade or cal ling]:
(a) in a place having a popula tion of less than 50,000 Rs. 1000
(b) in a place having a populati on of 50,000 and above but less
than 1,00,000 Rs. 1500
(c) in a place having a popula tion of 1,00,000 and above Rs. 2500
6. Occupi ers of factories as defined in the Fact ories Act , 1948 (63 of
1948) but excl uding those covered by entry 7 :
(i) Where not more than fifteen workers are worki ng Rs. 1500
(ii) Where m ore than fifteen workers are worki ng Rs. 2500
27. Deal ers l iable to pay tax under M adhya Pradesh Vani jyik Kar
Adhi i 1994 (N 5f1995)h i

1932) which are engaged in any profession, trad e or calling but excluding firm s covered in any
Sr. No. 7 and entries relating thereto substituted by Professional Tax (Amendment) Act, 2001
7. Dealers liable to pay tax under Madhy a Pradesh Commercial Tax Act, 1994
(No. 5 of 1995) whose annual gross turnover is :
⇒

X LAWS IN M.P.
Adhi niyam, 1994 (No. 5 of 1995) whose gross t urnover i s :
(i) Less t han Rs. 5,00,000 Nil
(ii) Exceeds Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed Rs. 10,00,000 Rs. 1000
(iii) Exceeds Rs. 10,00,000 but does not exceed Rs. 50,00,000 Rs. 2000
(iv) Rs. 50,00,000 or m ore Rs. 2500
8. Holders of perm its for t ransport vehi cles grant ed under the Motor
Vehi cles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) whi ch are used or adapt ed to be
used for hire or reward :
(i) in respect of each three wheel er passenger or goods vehicle Rs. (ii) in respect of each taxi, f our wheeler light passenger or goods
vehicle Rs. (iii) in respect of each heavy passenger or goods vehicle Rs. Subject to the maximum of R s. 2500
[9. Such persons other than those m entioned in any of the preceding
entries, who are engaged i n any professi on, trade, calling or
employm ent at such rate as the St ate Governm ent may, by
notificatio n, specify]
Explanati on - For the purposes of t his Schedul e popul ation m eans t he popul ation as
ascertained at the last precedi ng census of which the relevant figures have been published.

⇒
(i) Less than Rs. 5,00,000 Nil
(ii) Rs. 5,00,000 or more but less than Rs. 10,00,000 Rs. 500
(iii) Rs. 10,00,000 or m ore but less than Rs. 50,00,000 Rs. 1000
(iv) Rs. 50,00,000 or more Rs. 2500

substitution Sr. No. 9 read as under :
“Such pers ons not covered by any of the preceding entries , as the State Governm ent may, by
notification, s pecify ”

Madhya Pradesh Professional Tax Rules, 1995
1Notification. No. A-5-6-95-ST-V(58) Dated 17th July 1995
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 28 of the Madhya Pradesh Vritti Kar
Adhiniyam, 1995 (No. 16 of 1995), the State Government hereby makes the
following rules, namely :
Rule 1 : Short title
These rules may be called the Madhya Pradesh Vritti Kar Niyam, 1995.
Rule 2 : Definitions
In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires :
(a) Act means the Madhya Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniyam, 1995 (No. 16 of 1995);
(b) Form means a Form appended to these rules;
(c) Place of Work in relation to a person or employer means the place where such
person or employer ordinarily carries on his profession, trade, calling or
employment;
(d) Quarter means a period of three months commencing from 1st April, 1st July,
1st October and 1st January;
(e) Section means a Section of the Act;
(f) Treasury in respect of a person or an employer [whose principal place of work]
is situated within the jurisdiction of a Profession Tax Assessing Authority, means
the branch of a scheduled bank trans acting business of the Government of
Madhya Pradesh or any Government Treasur y or sub-treasury as the case may be,
located within the jurisdiction of the said authority.
Rule 3 : Grant of certif icate of registration
(1) (a) An application for obtaining a certificate of registration under sub-section (1) of Section 8 shall be made in Form I.
3(b) Where an employer has more than one place of work within the State of
Madhya Pradesh, he shall make a single application in respect of all such places,
declaring therein one of such places as th e principal place of work and others as
additional places of work for the purpose of these rules and submit such application to
the Profession Tax Assessing Authority in w hose jurisdiction the said principal place
of work is situated.
(2) (a) An application for obtaining a certificate of registration under sub-section (2) of Section 8 shall be made in Form 3.

Published in Madhya Pradesh Rajpatra dt. 17.7.95.
‘An employer having places of work within the jurisdiction of more than one Profession Tax
Assessing Authority shall make an application for registration separately to each such authority
in respect of each such place of work within the jurisdiction of the said Authority.’
X LAWS IN M.P.
(b) Where a person has more than one place of work within the State of Madhya
Pradesh, he shall make a single application in respect of all such places, declaring
therein one of such places as the principa l place of work and others as additional
places of work for the purpose of these rules and subm it such application to the
Profession Tax Assessing Author ity in whose jurisdiction the said principal place of
work is situated.
(3) (a) On receipt of an application for registration the Profession Tax Assessing
Authority shall, if it is satisfied that the application is in order and the necessary
particulars have been furnished, grant a certif icate of registration in Form 2 in respect
of application filed under sub-rule (1) and in Form 4 in respect of application filed
under sub-rule (2).
(b) If the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority finds that the application is not in order
or that all necessary particulars have not been furnished it shall direct the applicant to
furnish such additional inform ation as m ay be considered necessary . After
considering the additional inform ation, the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority shall
grant a certificate of registration in Form 2 or 4 as the case m ay be.
Rule 4 : Amendment of certificate of registration
Where an em ployer or a person holding a cer tificate of registration granted under rule
desires it to be am ended, he shall subm it an application to the Profession Tax
Assessing A uthority specifically stating the amendm ents desired with reasons
therefor, together w ith the certificate of registration and thereupon such authority
shall, if satisfied with the reasons gi ven, am end the certificate of registration
accordingly.
1Rule 4-A : Option to pay tax on the Annual Income
An application to exercise option to pay tax on the annual incom e under sub-section
(3) of Section 3 shall be m ade in Form 4-A.]
Rule 5 : Intimation regarding ce ssation of liability to pay tax
In the event of cessation of liability to pay tax because of closure of business or for
any other reason, the em ployer or the pe rson holding the certificate of registration
shall send an intim ation in writing to that effect to the Profession Tax Assessing
Authority within thirty days of the cessation of liability to pay tax.
Rule 6 : Cancellation of certificate
On receipt of an intim ation under rule 5, the certificate of registration granted under
rule 3, may be cancelled by the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority after satisfy ing
itself that the liability to pay tax of the em ployer or the person to whom such
certificate was granted, has ceased.
Rule 7 : Exhibition of certificate
The em ployer or the person holding a certificate of registration shall display
conspicuously at his place of work the certif icate of registration or a copy thereof
issued by the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority .
Rule 8 : Issue of a duplic ate copy of certificate

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 323
If a certificate of registration granted under thes e rules is lost, destroy ed or defaced or
becom es illegible, the holder of the certificate shall apply to the Profession Tax
Assessing A uthority for grant of a duplicat e copy of such certificate and thereupon
such authority shall, after such verificati on as it may consider necessary, issue to the
holder of certificate a copy of the original certificate after stam ping thereon the words
“Duplicate Copy”.
Rule 9 : Certificate to be furnis hed by an employee to his employer
The certificate to be furnished by a person to his em ployer under sub-section (2) of
Rule 10 : Shifting of place of w ork
(1) If the holder of certificate of registration in one area, shifts his place of work in
another area, he shall w ithin fifteen day s of such shifting, give notice thereof to the
Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority by whom the certificate w as issued and shall, at
the same time, send a copy of such notice to the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority
exercising jurisdiction over the area to which the place of work is being or has been
shifted.
(2) With effect from the commencem ent of the quarter im mediately following the
quarter in which the notice is given, the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority having
jurisdiction over the area to which the place of work has been shifted shall exercise
all pow ers and perform all functions pertaining to the determ ination and recovery of
tax and m atters ancillary thereto in respect of the sender of such notice.
Rule 11 : Furnishing of returns and payment of tax by employer
(1) Every employer registered under the Act shall furnish return in Form 7 for each
quarter on or before the fifteenth day of the m onth follow ing the quarter to which
such returns relates show ing therein the salaries and w ages paid by him during such
quarter and the am ount of tax deducted by him from the said salaries and w ages.
Provided that w here an em ployer pay s to his em ployee, salary or w ages in respect
of a month falling in any quarter on any date after the expiry of such quarter, then
such pay ment and the tax deducted in respect thereof m ay be accounted for in the
return for the quarter during w hich such pay ment has been m ade and tax deducted.
(2) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub-rule (1), every employer shall furnish
the return for every quarter by the due date even if no tax is payable by the person in
his em ployment.
(3) Every return to be furnished under sub-ru le (1) shall be accom panied by receipted
challans in token of the paym ent in accordan ce with the provisions of sub-rule (1) of
rule 13 of the tax payable by the em ployer according to such return.
(4) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub-rule (1), an em ployer registered under
the A ct, may, on his application to the Profession Tax Com missioner in Form 8 for
perm ission to furnish annual return, be perm itted to furnish such return subject to the
conditions as specified in the order granting perm ission to file annual return.
Rule 12 : Furnishing of return and p ayment of tax by registered persons
(1) Every registered person required to furnis h return under sub-section (1) of Section
shall furnish such returns in Form 9 to the Profession Tax A ssessing Authority
along with a copy of challan in proof of payment of tax pay able according to such
return.

X LAWS IN M.P.
(2) A registered person who derives incom e from any profession, trade or calling
other than agriculture at places located within the territorial jurisdiction of m ore than
one Profession Tax A ssessing Authority shall file the return under sub-rule (1) to the
Profession Tax Assessing Authority having jurisdiction over his principal place of
work so declared by him under clause (b) of sub-rule (2) of rule 3.
Rule 13 : D eduction of tax by employers from the salaries and w ages
(1) Every em ployer other than an officer of the Central G overnm ent or a State
Governm ent responsible for deduction of the due am ount of tax from the salary or
wages of the em ployees as defined in clause (c) of Section 2 shall deduct every month
from the salaries or w ages pay able to the em ployees an am ount equal to 1/12th of the
tax payable by each em ployee for the relevant year.
(2) In the case of em ployee of the Central G overnm ent or a State Governm ent the
draw ing and disbursing officer shall be responsible for the deduction of the am ount of
tax pay able from the pay bill of em ployee as defined in clause (c) of Section 2. The
deduction shall be m ade every month from the salaries or w ages pay able to the
employees and the am ount of tax to be so deducted in each m onth shall be equal to
1/12th of the am ount of tax pay able by the em ployee for the relevant y ear.
(3) The draw ing and disbursing officer in the case of em ployees of the G overnm ent of
Madhy a Pradesh shall deduct the tax from the salaries or w ages of the em ployees in
the pay bills. The drawing and disbursing o fficer of the Central Governm ent or any
State Governm ent (other than the State of Madhy a Pradesh) shall deduct in cash the
tax w hile disbursing salaries or w ages to the em ployees.
(4) The draw ing and disbursing officer in the case of em ployees of the G overnm ent of
Madhy a Pradesh shall enclose a statem ent with the pay bill for the m onth of February
show ing deductions of the tax due for the period from March to February or part
thereof or from the m onth in w hich the em ployees has becom e liable to pay the tax
upto the month of February , as the case m ay be. In case any deduction in respect of
any employee has not been m ade the salary or w age of such em ployee for the m onth
of February shall not be draw n without deducting the am ount of tax that remains to be
deducted for the aforesaid period.
(5) The draw ing and disbursing officers shall furnish to the Profession Tax A ssessing
Authority, having jurisdiction over their places of work, not later than 30th April, a
certificate that the tax payable in respect of the em ployees for whom they drew the
pay bills during the year im mediately preceding has been deducted in accordance
with the provisions of the Schedule appended to the A ct.
(6) The Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority may, if it considers necessary , require
any draw ing and disbursing officer to furnish to him a statem ent relating to the
payment of salaries or w ages to the G overnm ent em ployees during any specific
period. Such statem ent shall show the name of the em ployee, the details of salary
draw n, the am ount of tax deducted therefrom and the period to w hich the tax relates.
(7) Notwithstanding the provisions of rule 11 and sub-rules (1), (2), and (3) of this
rule, the liability of an em ployee to pay tax shall not cease unless the amount of tax
due in respect of him has been fully paid to the Governm ent account, and without
prejudice to the aforesaid provisions, the sa id am ount m ay be recovered from him if
the employer or the Profession Tax A ssessi ng A uthority is satisfied that the am ount
has not been deducted from his salary or w ages.

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 325
Rule 14 : Employer to keep account of de duction of tax from the salary of the
employees
Every employer responsible to deduct and pay tax shall m aintain a register in which
the amount of salary and wages paid to each of the persons in his em ployment and the
amount deducted from the salary and wages of the em ployee on account of tax shall
be entered.
Rule 15 : Method of payment
(1) Every employer, other than the G overnm ent of Madhy a Pradesh, and every person
shall pay the amount of tax, penalty or any other am ount due from or im posed upon
him direct into the treasury . No pay ment of any such am ount shall be accepted in the
office of the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority or any other A uthority appointed
under the A ct.
(2) Every payment under sub-rule (1) shall be m ade by challan in Form 10 under the
head 028-O ther Taxes on Incom e and Expenditure B-Taxes on Professions, Trade,
Callings and Em ployments. The challan shall be in quadruplicate.
Rule 16 : Reconciliation of payment
In the first week of the m onth following each month, the Profession Tax Assessing
Authority shall prepare a statem ent in Form 11 and forward it to the Treasury Officer
concerned for verification. If any discrepancy is discovered on verification, the
Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority shall send the necessary records to the Treasury
Officer for reconciliation of accounts.
Rule 17 : Notice under Section 8( 4), 8(5), 9(3) , 10(4) or 13
The notice for giving reasonable opportunity of being heard under sub-section (4) or
sub-section (5) of Section 8 or sub-section (3) of Secti on 9 or sub-section (4) of
Form 12.
Rule 18 : N otice under Sections 11(3), 11(4) and 16
(1) The notice under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of Section 11 shall be issued by the
Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority in Form 13.
(2) The notice under sub-section (4) of Section 11 and Section 16 shall be issued by
the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority in Form 14.
Rule 19 : Order of assessment
The order of assessm ent under Section 11 or under sub-section (2) of Section 16 shall
be passed in Form 15.
Rule 20 : N otice of demand
The notice of dem and under Section 14 relating to any tax or penalty pay able in
consequence of any order passed or in pursu ance of any provision of the A ct shall be
issued by the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority in Form 16.
Rule 21 : A ppeal
(1) An appeal under Section 17 shall -
(a) be m ade in Form 17;
(b) be presented to the appropriate Prof ession Tax A ppellate A uthority by the
appellant in person or by his duly authoris ed agent or legal practitioner or be sent
by registered post to such authority ;

X LAWS IN M.P.
(c) contain a clear statem ent of the relevant facts and state precisely the relief prayed
for;
(d) be accom panied by an authenticated copy of the order against which appeal is
filed, as w ell as other relevant papers;
(e) be duly signed and verified by the appellant; and
(f) be accom panied by a treasury receipted cha llan in proof of having paid in full the
amount of tax or penalty in respect of w hich the appeal is being preferred.
(2) An appeal m ay be sum marily rejected on any of the follow ing grounds :
(a) non-com pliance of the provisions of Section 17;
(b) filing of the appeal after the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (2) of
(c) non-com pliance of any requirem ent of sub-rule (1).
(3) If the Profession Tax A ppellate A uthority does not reject the appeal summarily
under sub-rule (2), it shall fix a date for hearing the appellant or his duly authorised
agent.
(4) If on the date fixed for hearing or any other date to w hich the hearing m ay be
adjourned, the appellant does not appear before the said authority either in person or
through a person duly authorised by the appellant, the said authority may dism iss the
appeal or m ay decide it ex-parte, as it thinks fit.
(5) A copy of the order passed in appeal shall be sent to the appellant and another
copy shall be sent to the authority who had passed the im pugned order.
Rule 22 : Order sanctioning refund of tax
(1) When the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority is satisfied that a refund of any
amount of tax or penalty is due either becau se of excess pay ment or the order of the
appellate or the revisional authority or any other court, it shall, if the em ployer or
person desires pay ment in cash, issue to him a refund pay ment order in Form 18.
(2) The Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority issuing the refund payment order shall
intim ate the num bers of the books thereof in use for the tim e being to the Treasury
Officer within his jurisdiction.
(3) Where the am ount of refund is required to be adjusted against any arrears of tax,
penalty or any other am ount due under the A ct, the Profession Tax Assessing
Authority shall issue a refund adjustm ent order in Form 19 in respect of the refund so
adjusted authorising the em ployer or pers on to deduct that am ount from the arrears of
tax outstanding against him .
(4) In support of any claim for deduction according to sub-rule (3) the em ployer or
person shall attach his copy of refund adjustm ent order to the challan show ing the
credit into the treasury of the balance of the am ount in respect of w hich a notice of
demand has been issued under Section 14.
Rule 23 : A uthority sanctioning prosecution
The Profession Tax Com missioner shall be the authority for the purpose of subsection (2) of Section 23.
Rule 24 : Order accepting composition money
(1) Where the Profession Tax Assessing Authority accepts under Section 25 from any
employer or person a sum by way of com positi on of an offence, it shall m ake an order

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 327
in writing in that behalf specify ing therein :
(i) the sum determ ined by way of com position;
(ii) the date on or before which the sum shall be paid into the treasury ;
(iii) the authority before whom and the date by which a receipted challan shall be
produced in proof of such pay ment; and
(iv) the date by which the employer or person shall report the fact of such
payment to the Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority .
(2) The Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority shall send a copy of such order to the
employer or person from whom the said sum is accepted by way of com position.
Rule 25 : Restrictions and conditions subj ect to which powers may be delegated
by the Profession Tax C ommissioner under sub-section (2) of Section 20
The Profession Tax Com missioner may delegate his pow ers under sub-section (1) of
(i) The pow ers under sub-section (1) of Secti on 20 shall not be exercised in respect
of the following:
(a) Drawing and D isbursing O fficers of the Central G overnm ent and the State
Governm ent;
(b) Persons pay ing tax at the highest rate leviable under the A ct.
(ii) The Com mercial Tax Inspectors shall not exercise the powers under sub-section
(1) of Section 20 delegated to them unless specifically directed, in w riting, by the
Profession Tax A ssessing A uthority concerned.
Rule 26 : Service of Notices
(1) Notice under the A ct or the rules m ade thereunder m ay be served by any of the
follow ing m ethods nam ely :
(i) by delivering or tendering a copy of th e notice to the addressee or any adult
member of his fam ily residing w ith him or to a person regularly employed by
him; or
(ii) by post :
Provided that if upon an attem pt being m ade to serve any such notice by any of
the above mentioned methods the authority under w hose orders the notice w as
issued is satisfied that the addressee is keeping out of the w ay for the purpose of
avoiding service or that, for any other reason, the notice cannot be served by any
of the above mentioned methods, the said authority shall order the service of the
notice to be effected by affixing a copy thereof on som e conspicuous part of the
addressee’s office or the building in which his office is located or where he
habitually resides, or upon any conspicuous part of any place of profession, trade,
calling or employment last notified by him and such service shall be deem ed to
have been duly served on the addressee personally .
(2) When the serving officer delivers or tende rs a copy of the notice to the addressee
personally or to any of the persons referred to in clause (i) of sub-rule (1), he shall
require the signature or thum b impression of the person to w hom the copy is so
delivered or tendered as an acknow ledgm ent of service endorsed on the original
notice.
(3) When a notice is served by affixing a copy thereof in accordance with the proviso

X LAWS IN M.P.
to sub-rule (1), the serving officer shall return the original to the authority which
issued the notice w ith the report endorsed thereon or annexed thereto stating that he
so affixed the copy , the circum stances under w hich he did so and the name and the
address of the person, if any , by whom the addressee’s office or building in w hich his
office is or was located or his place of pr ofession, trade, calling or em ploym ent or
residence w as identified and in w hose presence the copy was affixed. The serving
officer shall also state in his report how the signature or thum b im pression of the
person identifying the addressee’s office or building or place of profession, trade,
calling or em ployment or residence w as obtained.
(4) When service is m ade by post, the service shall be deem ed to be effective if the
notice has been properly addressed and sent by registered post acknow ledgm ent due
and unless the contrary is proved, the service shall be deem ed to have been effected at
the time at which the notice w ould have been delivered in the ordinary course of
postal business.
(5) The authority under w hose orders the notice w as issued shall, on being satisfied
from the report of the serving officer or the postal acknow ledgem ent or by taking
such evidence as it deem s proper that the notice has been served in accordance with
the provisions of this rule, record the f act and m ake an order to that effect.
(6) If the authority is not satisfied that the notice has been properly served, it m ay,
after recording as order to that effect , direct the issue of a fresh notice.
_______________
FORM - 1
[See rule 3(1)]
Application for regis tration (for emp loyers )
To,
The Profession Tax Assessing Authority
............................................................
I, hereby apply for a certificate of registra tion under the Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am,
as per particulars given below :-
1. Name of the applicant ..........................
2. Addres s of the principal place of work (building/s treet/ road/m unicipal
ward/ town/ city /tehsil /district) ..........................
3. Status of the person signing the fo rm (Whether proprietor / partner
/principal /officer/ agent /m anager / director/ s ecretary ) ..........................
4. Name of the em ployer ..........................
5. Class of the employ er (whether individual /firm/ company /corporation/
society /club / as sociation). ..........................
6. If registered under the Madhy a Pradesh Vanijy ik Kar Adhiniy am, 1994/
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, the num ber of registration certificate,- ..........................
(a) Under Vanijy ik Kar Adhiniy am
(b) Under Central Sales Tax ..........................
..........................
7. Names and addres ses of other places of w ork in M adhya Pradesh. ..........................
The above statements are true to th e best of my knowledge and belief.
Place.......................... Signature.................................
Date.......................... Status.......................................
*Strike out whichever is not applicable

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 329
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
(Particulars of nam e and address to be filled in by the applicant)
Received an application for regis tration in F orm - 1.
From :-
Name of the applicant...........................
Full pos tal addres s...............................
Place.......................... .......................................
Date........................... Signature of the receiving officer
_______________

FORM – 2
(See rule 3(3))
Certificate of regis tration (for emp loyers )

No.________________

This is to certify that the proprietor/part ner /principal/officer/agent/m anager/head of the
office of the establishment/firm/club/associ ation/society /corporation/company known as
__________and located at ______has been registered as an employ er under the Madhy a Pradesh
Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995.

The holder of the certificate has additional place of work at the following addres s :-

1.___________________
2.___________________
3.___________________

Seal;
Place.......................... Signature.................................
Date.......................... Status.......................................

FORM - 3
[See rule 3(2)]
Application for certificate of regis tration (for p ersons)
To,
The Profession Tax Assessing Authority
............................................................
I, hereby apply for a certificate of registra tion under the Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am,
as per particulars given below :-
1. Name of the applicant .....................
2. Profession/ trade/ calling (here s pecify the S erial num ber of the s chedule
under which liable to pay tax). .....................
3. Addres s of the place of work (building /street / road/ m unicipal ward /town /
city /tehsil / district). .....................
4. *Date of com mencem ent of pr ofession /trade/ calling. .....................

X LAWS IN M.P.
5. *Period of s tanding in the profes sion .....................
*Number of beds (in the cas e of res idential hotels ) .....................
*Whether a s tate level s ociety , a dis trict level s ociety , a co-operative s ugar
factory or a co-operative sugar m ill. .....................
*Average number of employ ees dur ing a y ear em ployed in the
establishm ent .....................
* Average num ber of w orkers during a y ear. .....................
* Annual gro ss tur nover .....................
* Number of,- .....................
(i) Three wheeler passe nger/goods ve hicles .....................
(ii) Taxi/four wheeler light passenger/goods vehicles .....................
(iii) Heavy passenge r/goods vehi cles .....................
6. Income during the previous y ear (to be given by a person opting to pay tax
under sub-section (3) of Section 3.) He re state specifically whether option
under sub-section (3) of Section 3 is being exercised or not. .....................
7. If carry ing on a profession, trade or calling other than agriculture in addition
to an employ ment, the particulars ther eof or if simultaneously engaged in
employ ment of more than one employ er, the names and addresses of all
such em ployers and the m onthly salary received form each of them . .....................
8. Nam es and addres ses of additional places of work if any , in the S tate of
Madhya Pradesh 1......................
2......................
3......................
9. If registered under the Madhy a Pradesh Vanijy ik Kar Adhiniy am,
1994/Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 the numbe r of the registration certificate,-
(a) under M.P. Vanijy ik Kar A dhiniy am .....................
(b) under Central Sa les Tax Act. .....................
The above statements are true to th e best of my knowledge and belief.
Place.......................... Signature.................................
Date.......................... Status.......................................
*Fill in whichever is applicable.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
(Particulars of nam e and address to be filled in by the applicant)
Received an application for regis tration in F orm -3.
From :-
Name of the applicant...........................
Full pos tal addres s...............................
Place.......................... .......................................
Date........................... Signature of the receiving officer

_______________
FORM 4
(see ru le 3(3))
Certificate of regis tration (for p ersons)

No. _______________ District ___________________

This is to certify that _________________ engaged in * profession/trade/calling known
as ________________ */sim ultaneously in a profession, trade or calling other than agriculture in

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 331
addition to em ployment with the principal place of work located at _____________has been
registered under the Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995.

The holder of this certificate has additional places of work at the following addres ses –

(1).___________ _________________
(2) ___________________________
(3) __________________________
(4)___________________________
S eal
Place _________________ .......................................
Date........................... Signature _____________________
Designation___________________

*Strike out w hichever is not applicable
FORM - 4 A
[See rule 4-A]
Application to exercis e option
To,
The Profession Tax Assessing Authority
...............................................................
I...............(Nam e) of..............(Addr ess) holding registration certificate No............date............ under
the M.P. Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995 liable to pay tax according to serial num ber 2 of the Schedule
appended to the said Adhiniy am, hereby opt to pa y on the annual income as specified in column (2)
agains t serial num ber 1 of the s aid schedule in lieu of the tax pay able by me, for the period............
Place................
Date.................
_______________
FORM - 5
[See rule 9]
Certificate to b e furnished by person to h is emp loyer
I...........(N ame of the pers on).........(addres s) hereby certif y that I am engaged in the profes sion, trade
or calling specified in entry .........of the Schedule to the M.P. Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995 and the
rate of tax pay able by me under the said entry is more than the rate of tax payable under entry 1 in
the said schedule in res pect of m y employment with..........(nam e of the em ployer)...........(addres s).
I also certify that, *I shall get my self registered and shall pay the tax my self under the said entry .
OR
*I have got m yself registered under regist ration certificate No............dated.........and shall pay the
tax/have paid the tax stated therein my self.
Place......................... ......................................
Date.......................... Signature
*Strike out whichever is not applicable
_______________
FORM - 6
[See Rule 9]

X LAWS IN M.P.
Certificate to b e furnished by a person who is simultaneously
engaged in employ ment of more than one employ er
I...................(N ame of the pers on) engaged in em ployment with the follow ing em ployers, nam ely :
Name of employ er Address of the employ er
(1) (2)
(1) ...................................................... ......................................................
(2) ...................................................... ......................................................
(3) ...................................................... ......................................................
(4) ...................................................... ......................................................
And that I shall get my self registered and pay the tax/I have got my self registered under the
regis tration certificate N o.......dated.........and s hall pay the tax/*have paid tax s tated therein m yself.
Place......................... ......................................
Date.......................... Signature
*Strike out whichever is not applicable.
_______________
FORM - 7
[See Rule 11]
Retu rn (for emp loyer)
Return of tax pay able for the period from ................................to.........................
Name of th e em ployer.........................................................................................
Addres s..............................................................................................................
Regis tration cer tificate N o..................................................................................
Employ ees whose Annual
salaries / wages are No. of employ ees Rate of tax per
month Amount of tax
deducted
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Less than Rs. 40001 .................... .................... ....................
Rs. 40001 to Rs. 50000 .................... .................... ....................
Rs. 50001 to Rs. 60000 .................... .................... ....................
Rs. 60001 to Rs. 80000 .................... .................... ....................
Rs. 80001 to Rs. 100000 .................... .................... ....................
Rs. 100001 to Rs. 150000 .................... .................... ....................
Exceeding Rs. 150000 .................... .................... ....................
Amount of tax payable ....................
Amount paid with cha llan No. and Date. ....................
The above statements are true to th e best of my knowledge and belief.
Place.......................... Signature.................................
Date.......................... Status.......................................
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
(Particulars of nam e and address to be filled in by the em ployer)
Received a return for the pe riod from .......................to........................w ith challan
No....................dated.....................for Rs ....................from ,-
Name of the em ployer...........................
Full pos tal addres s...............................
.......................................

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 333
Place..........................
Date........................... Signature with full name and designation of the
receiving official
_______________
FORM - 8
[See rule 11 (4)]
Application for p ermis sion to fu rnish retu rn for a year
To,
The Profession Tax Commissioner,
....................................................
I........................................(N ame) of.....................................(addres s) a re gistered em ployer holding
registration certificate No.....................under the Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995
hereby apply for perm ission to furnis h with effect from .............................r eturns for a period
covering a y ear in accordance with rule.....................of the Madhya Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am,
1995.
I/We have in m y/our em ployment.............................em ployees (state no. of employees) each
earning annual salary or wages of not less than Rupees forty thousand and their break up according
to the slab of s alary or wages specified in entr y 1 of the Schedule to the said Adhiniy am is as
follows :
No. of employ ees
Less than Rs. 40001 ............................
Rs. 40001 to Rs. 50000 ............................
Rs. 50001 to Rs. 60000 ............................
Rs. 60001 to Rs. 80000 ............................
Rs. 80001 to Rs. 100000 ............................
Rs. 100001 to Rs. 150000 ............................
Exceeding Rs . 1,50,000 ............................
I/We declare that the above statements are tr ue to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Place.......................... Signature.................................
Date.......................... Status.......................................
FORM - 9
[See rule 12 (1)]
Retu rn (for p ersons)
Return of tax pay able for the period from ........................to...........................
Name of th e pers on ........................................
Addres s ........................................
Regis tration cer tificate N o. ........................................
Particulars of P rofession/trade/calling (here s tate category of the
schedule under which liable to pay tax). ........................................
If option has been exercised under sub-section (3) of Section 3,
then Income from :
(a) P rofits and gains ........................................
(b) D ividend & interes t ........................................
(c) Any benefit or perquisite de scribed in sub-clause (iii) of
clause (e) of Section 2. ........................................
Total ........................................
Tax pay able ........................................
Amount paid with cha llan No. a nd date. ........................................
The above statements are true to th e best of my knowledge and belief.

X LAWS IN M.P.
Place.......................... Signature.................................
Date.......................... Status.......................................
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
(Particulars of nam e and address to be filled in by the person)
Received a return for the pe riod from .......................to........................w ith challan
No....................dated.....................for Rs ....................from ,-
Name of the pers on...............................
Full pos tal addres s...............................
.......................................
Place..........................
Date........................... Signature with full name and designation of the
receiving official
_______________
FORM – 10
(See rule 15(2))
Challan
(Original – to be sent to the Pr ofession Tax Assessing Authority )

The Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995

(028- Other taxes on incom e and expenditure – B Taxes on Professions, Trade, Callings and
Employ ment)

By whom rendered Name, Address,
registration No. and
case No. if any on
whose behalf the
money is paid Payment on account
of Amount
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(a) tax according to
return for the period
from _______ to
_______
(b)_ tax demanded
after assessme nt for
the period from
________to _______
(c) Penalty
(d)composition fees Value Rs._______(in
words)
Rs._____________

Total Rs.____________( in figures) Rs. ___________(in words)

Date___________ Signature of the depositor

(for u se in the Treas ury or th e Ban k)

1. Received pay ment of Rs. ________ (in figures) Rs. _______________ (in words)
2. Date of entry _________________

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 335
__________________ ________________ ____________
Treasury Accountant Treasury Officer

FORM – 10
(See rule 15(2))
Challan
(Duplicxate – to b e retain ed in the Treas ury)

The Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995

(028- Other taxes on incom e and expenditure – B Taxes on Professions, Trade, Callings and
Employ ment)

By whom rendered Name, Address,
registration No. and
case No. if any on
whose behalf the
money is paid Payment on account
of Amount
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(a) tax according to
return for the period
from _______ to
_______
(b)_ tax demanded
after assessme nt for
the period from
________to _______
(c) Penalty
(d)composition fees Value Rs._______(in
words)
Rs._____________

Total Rs.____________( in figures) Rs. ___________(in words)

Date___________ Signature of the depositor

(for u se in the Treas ury or th e Ban k)

3. Received pay ment of Rs. ________ (in figures) Rs. _______________ (in words)
4. Date of entry _________________

__________________ ________________ ____________
Treasury Accountant Treasury Officer
FORM – 10
(See rule 15(2))
Challan
(Trip licate- to b e given to th e payer for b eing sent to th e Profes sional Tax Officer)

The Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995

X LAWS IN M.P.

(028- Other taxes on incom e and expenditure – B Taxes on Professions, Trade, Callings and
Employ ment)

By whom rendered Name, Address,
registration No. and
case No. if any on
whose behalf the
money is paid Payment on account
of Amount
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(a) tax according to
return for the period
from _______ to
_______
(b)_ tax demanded
after assessme nt for
the period from
________to _______
(c) Penalty
(d)composition fees Value Rs._______(in
words)
Rs._____________

Total Rs.____________( in figures) Rs. ___________(in words)

Date___________ Signature of the depositor

(for u se in the Treas ury or th e Ban k)

5. Received pay ment of Rs. ________ (in figures) Rs. _______________ (in words)
6. Date of entry _________________

__________________ ________________ ____________
Treasury Accountant Treasury Officer
FORM – 10
(See rule 15(2))
Challan
(Quadr uplic ate to be give n to the payer for his ow n use )

The Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995

(028- Other taxes on incom e and expenditure – B Taxes on Professions, Trade, Callings and
Employ ment)

By whom rendered Name, Address,
registration No. and
case No. if any on
whose behalf the
money is paid Payment on account
of Amount
(1) (2) (3) (4)

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 337
(a) tax according to
return for the period
from _______ to
_______
(b)_ tax demanded
after assessme nt for
the period from
________to _______
(c) Penalty
(d)composition fees Value Rs._______(in
words)
Rs._____________

Total Rs.____________( in figures) Rs. ___________(in words)

Date___________ Signature of the depositor

(for u se in the Treas ury or th e Ban k)

7. Received pay ment of Rs. ________ (in figures) Rs. _______________ (in words)
8. Date of entry _________________

__________________ ________________ ____________
Treasury Accountant Treasury Officer

FORM 11
(see rule 16)
Statement of verification of collections under the Mad hya Prad esh Vritti Kar
Adhiniy am, 1995

To,

The Treas ury Officer,
_____________

Total am ount com prising of tax, penalty and com position m oney deposited in the treasuries and
sub-treasuries of district:-

Particulars Total amount Signature with seal of
Profession Tax Assessing
Authority and Treasury Officer
(1) (2) (3)
Amount shown as deposited according
to Profession Tax Assessing Authority 's
Register ------
Amount shown as deposited as per
Treasury accounts –
(a) by challan
(b) (2) by book transfer

X LAWS IN M.P.
(c) (to be filled in by Treasury
Officer
(d) (3) Total

REFUNDS
Particulars As per Profession Tax
Assessing Authority
register As per Treasury Register
(1) (2) (3)
Total receipts
Amount refund
Net collection

Signature of Profession Tax Assessing Authority

Signature of Treasury Officer

FORM 12
(See ru le 17)
Notice under section 8(4), 8(5), 9(34), 10(4) or 13 of the Mad hya Prad esh Vritti Kar
Adhiniy am, 1995

Name____________
Address________
Registration No. ___________

Whereas, y ou being an employ er/person liabl e to registration under sub-section (1)(2) of
certificate within the tim e specified in sub-section (3) of the said section and have consequently
rendered y ourself liable to penalty under sub-section (4) of Section 8.

Y ou being an employ er/person liable to regist ration have given false information in the
application given under section 8 and have consequently rendered yourself to pay penalty under
sub-section (5) of section 8.

OR
You being an employ er required to file return under sub-section (1) of Section 9 have failed to
file within the prescribed time return for the period _______ a nd have consequently rendered
yourself liable to penalty under sub-section (3) of section 9.

OR

You being a registered person required to file return under sub-section (1) of section 10 within
the time specified have failed to file return for the period __________ within such time and have
consequently rendered y ourself liable to pe nalty under sub-section (4) of Section 10.

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 339
OR

You being a registered employ er/person have failed to make payment of tax within the tim e
specified in the notice of demand and have conse quently rendered y ourself liable to penalty under

Now, therefore, y ou are hereby called upon to show cause personally or through a person
authorised by you in writing in that behalf at _________________(Place) __________ (tim e) on
_______ (date) that why the penalty should not be imposed upon y ou. Further y ou are required to
present y ourself or through the authorised person on th e said date for being heard in this regard.

You are also required to produce any evidence on which y ou rely in support of y our objection
on the aforesaid date.

Seal .......................................
Place..........................
Date........................... Signature with full name and designation of the
receiving official

FORM 13
(See rule 18(1)
Notice u nder clau ses (a) of s ub-section (3) of s ection 11 of the Mad hya Prad esh Vritti Kar
Adhiniy am, 1995
Name____________
Address________
Registration No. ___________

Whereas I desire to satisfy myself that the return(s) filed by you in respect of the period
from ________ to __________are correct and complkete, y ou are hereby directed to appear in
person or through an authorised person , at _______(place) __________(tim e) to produce evidence
in support of the return (s) and particulars of accounts in respect of *em ployees em ployed under
you/profession, trade or calling

Seal .......................................
Place..........................
Date........................... Signature with full name and designation of the
receiving official

*Strike out w hichever is not [applicable

FORM 14
(See ru le 18(2))

Notice u nder sub-section (4) of s ection 11 or s ub-section (1) of s ection 16 of the Madhya
Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995

To,

Name____________
Address________

X LAWS IN M.P.
Registration No. ___________

*You being an employ er/person liable to obtain registration certificate under the
Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am, 1995 or y ou be ing registered em ployer/person liable to pay
tax under the said Adhiniy am, have failed to file return for the period from __________ to
_________ and have thereby rendered y ourself liable under sub-section (4) of Section 11 to be
assessed to the best of judgment.

OR
*You being an em ployer/person liable to pay tax under the Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar
Adhiniy am, 1995 have not been assessed/have been under asse ssed for the period from ______ to
_______ and have thereby rendered y ourself liable to assessment/re-assessment under section 16.

Now, therefore, y ou are hereby called upon to show cause on ____________ why
you should not be assessed or re-assessed to tax to the best of judgment.

Further, y ou are hereby directed to attends in person or by person authorised by you in
writing in that behalf before me and to produce particulars and accounts relating to the *employ ees
employed under y ou/profession, trade or calling in respect of the aforesaid period and any evidence
on which y ou rely in support of y our objection, at __________ (place) _______(tim e) _________
(date) and further required to present y ourself or through an authorized agent person on the said
place, date and tim e to be heard in this regard.

Seal .......................................
Place..........................
Date........................... Signature with full name and designation of the
receiving official
*Strike out w hichever is not applicable

FORM 15
(See ru le 19)
Order of as sessment of an emp loyee/p erson
Name of the employ er/ person ___________
Address of the employ er/person ____________
Registration Certificate No. ______________
Period of assessment ___________
Assessment case No. _____________

As returned As determined
No. of
employees Rate of
tax Amount
of tax to
be
deducted No .of
employees Rate of
tax Amount of
tax to be
deducted
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Less tha n Rs.

Rs. 40001 to Rs.

Rs. 50001 to Rs.

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 341
Rs. 60001 to Rs.

Rs. 80001 to Rs.

Rs. 100001 to Rs.

Exceeding Rs .
1,50,000

Amount of tax as returned Amount of tax as determined

2. Particulars of
profession/trade/calling
(category of the schedule under
which liable to pay tax
3. Penalty under section (i) _________
(ii) _________
(iii)
4.. Total amount of tax/penalty
5.Amount paid alongwith
returns
6. Balance pay able/exces s
payment

Seal .......................................
Place..........................
Date........................... Signature
Designation______________
*Strike out w hichever is not applicable

FORM 16
(See ru le 20)
Notic e of de mand for payment of tax/pe nalty

To,

Name____________
Address________
Registration No. ___________

*.You have been asse ssed/re-assessed under the Madhy a Pradesh Vritti Kar Adhiniy am,
1995.

X LAWS IN M.P.

* You having failed to pay the tax for the period ___________ to ________ has been
determined under sub-section (1) of section 16 of the said Act.

You are hereby directed to deposit the fo llowing amount in the treasury wi8thin thirty
days from the due date of receipt of the notice and s end a copy of the receipt challan in token of
such pay ment within ______________ day s sof the date of deposit.

(1) Tax assessed ---------------------
(2) Penalty _____________
Total _____________

Challan No. Date Amount
(1) .................. .............. ............
(2) .................. .............. ............
(3) .................. .............. ............
(4) .................. .............. ............

Net demand rupees ______________(in figures) _____________(in words)

Seal .......................................
Place..........................
Date........................... Signature
Designation______________
*Strike out w hichever is not applicable

FORM - 17
[See rule 21]
Memorandum of appe al
To,
The Profession Tax Appellate Authority
...............................................................
I, hereby appeal and furnish the necessary particulars :
(1) Regis tration Cer tificate N o. .........................
(2) Name of the Em ployer/person .........................
(3) Style of profes sion/trade/calling .........................
(4) Addres s .........................
(5) Period involved under impugned orde r against which appeal is
preferred. .........................
(6) (a) Nam e of the authority who passed the impugned or der .........................
(b) D ate of order .........................
(c) Date of s ervice of dem and notice .........................
(d) Am ount demanded : (i) Tax .........................
(ii) Penalty .........................
Total .........................
(e) Am ount of admitted tax .........................

PART - IV PROFESSIO NAL TAX RULES , 1995 343
(f) Amount paid : (i) Tax .........................
(ii) Penalty .........................
Total .........................
(g) Am ount in dispute .........................
(7) Grounds on which appeal ha s been pref erred. .........................
A certified copy of the impugned order and a copy of challan in proof of pay ment of tax/penalty are
enclos ed.
The above statements are true to th e best of my knowledge and belief.
Place.......................... Signature.................................
Date.......................... Status.......................................

FORM 18
See rule 22(1)
Refund pay ment order
Book No. _____ Vr. No. ____
(under Rs._______)Counterfoil
Order for the refund of tax
under Madhy a Pradesh Vritti
Kar Adhiniy am, 1995 Refunds
(under Rs _____________).
(for use in the treasury only )
Order for the refund of tax
(payable at the Governm ent
Treasury sub-treasury within
three months of the date of
issue ) Refunds
(under Rs _____________).
Order for the refund of tax
(payable at the Governm ent
Treasury sub-treasury within
three months of the date of
issue )
Refund pay able to_______
R.C.No. ______Assessment
Case No.______ Date of order
directing refund amount of
refund No. in collection registe
showing the collection of
amount regarding which refund
is made.

Signature ______
Designation ________
Date ______
Signature of the recipient To,
The Treas ury/Sub-treas ury
Officer _______
1.Certified to the assessm ent
being R.C.No._______ to the
period from _____ to ______ a
refund of Rs. ______ is due to
________
2. The amount of tax
concerning which this refund is
allowed has been duly credited
into the Government Treasury .

3. Certified that no refund
order regarding the sum now in
question has previously been
entered in the original file of
assessment under my
signature.
4. Please pay to ________ the
sum of Rs _______(in figures)
Rs.______(in words)

Signature ______
Designation ________
Date ______ To,
The Treas ury/Sub-treas ury
Officer _______
1.Certified to the assessm ent
being R.C.No._______ to the
period from _____ to ______ a
refund of Rs. ______ is due to
________
2. The amount of tax
concerning which this refund is
allowed has been duly credited
into the Government Treasury .

3. Certified that no refund
order regarding the sum now in
question has previously been
entered in the original file of
assessment under my
signature.
4. Please pay to ________ the
sum of Rs _______(in figures)
Rs.______(in words)

Signature ______
Designation ________
Date ______

X LAWS IN M.P.
Treas ury Officer Treas ury Officer
Vr.No. ________Date of
encas hment in the Governm ent
Treasury _______ Date of encas hment in the
Government Treasury _______
/sub-treasury ________pay
Rs.______ only .
Signature_______
Treas ury /sub-treas ury officer

Claimant' s Signature and Date
_____ Treasury /sub-treasury
Officer.
Date of encas hment in the
Government Treasury _______
/sub-treasury ________pay
Rs.______ only .
Signature_______
Treas ury /sub-treas ury officer

Claimant' s Signature and Date
_____ Treasury /sub-treasury
Officer.

To,
The Profession Tax Assessing Authority ,

This is to certify that the refund of Rs .______ as per y our refund pay ment order, dated
_________ book No. ________ Vr./ No. _________ has been made on ______ (date)

Dated--------- Treasury /Sub-treasury Officer

FORM – 19
(See rule 22(3))
Refund adjustment order

Book No. __________________________ Vr. No. _____________

To,

The Treas ury/ sub-treas ury officer
__________

Certified that with reference to the asse ssment record of ______(Name) bearing registration
certificate No. _______ for he period from ______ to ______ a refund of Rs. _______ is due to
_______ (Name)

2. Certified that the tax/penalty concerning which this refund is allowed has been cr4edited into the
treas ury.

3. Certified that on refund order regarding the sum in question has previously been granted and this
order of refrund has been entered in the orig inal file of assessment under my signature.

4/ This refund is adjusted towards the amount of tax due from the said employ er/person for the
period from ________ to ______ Please, therefore, debit to 028-other taxes on income and
expenditure – B – Taxes on Professions, Trades , Callings and employ ment the sum of Rs.
___________ and credit the amount to 028-Other taxes on income and expendi8ture – B – Taxes on
Professions, Trades, Callings and Employ ment.

PART - IV PROFESSIONAL TAX RULES , 1995 345
Seal. Signature.................................
Date.......................... Designation.......................................

Copy forwarded to _____________ (give here the name of the employer/person)
for information.

. Signature.................................
Date.......................... Status.......................................

(To be returned to the issuing authority)
To,

The Profession Tax Assessing Authority,
___________________

With reference to your memorandum No.
______________dated___________________

dI have adjusted the refund of Rs. ___________ payable to ________________(Name)

Signature.................................
Date.......................... Treasury/sub-treasury officer.

By order and in the name of the Governor of Madhya Pradesh,
MANOJKUMAR, Secretary