The Madhya Pradesh Information Technology (Electronic Service Delivery)
Rules, 2017

1. Short Title and Commencement
2. Definitions
3. System of Electronic Service Delivery
4. Duty of the Competent Authority to notify the list of public services to be delivered through
electronic mode
5. Notification of signing authorities
6. Powers and Functions of Director of Electronic Service Delivery
7. Authorised Service Providers for Electronic Service Delivery
8. Appointment of authorised agents by the Authorised Service Provider
9. Com mencement of operations by Authorised Service Provider
10. Authorised Service Provider to collect service charge
11. Fee to be collected by service provider
12. Remittance of service charge and fee by the service provider
13. Presumption with regard to service charge paid to service provider and other conditions of
obtaining e -services
14. Receipt or payment of money by or in favour of Government adopting the system of Electronic
Service Delivery
15. Filing of form, application or any other document
16. Issue or grant of any license, permit, sanction or approval
17. Creation of repository of digitally signed electronic records
18. Procedure for making changes in a repository of digitally signed electronic records
19. Creation of secure application software for Electronic Service Delivery
20. Delivery of e-Services by the Authorised Service Provider or Authorised Agent
21. Verification of Digitally Signed documents
22. Audit of the Information Systems and Accounts of Authorised Service Provider and authorised
agents
23. Use of special stationery in Electronic Serv ice Delivery
24. Repeal And Saving

The Madhya Pradesh Information Technology (Electronic Service Delivery)
Rules, 2017
:: NOTIFICATION ::
Dated, 03/07/2017
No-F 8-2/2016/Forty one(2) : -In exercise of the powers conferred under section 90 read with sections 6
and 6A of the Information Technology Act, 2000, (No. 21 of 2000) and in supersession of the Department
notification no. F 3 -1/2007/Fifty six, date 12/07/2011 the Government of Mad hya Pradesh hereby makes
the following rules, namely:
Rules
1. Short Title and Commencement. -
(1) These rules may be called the Madhya Pradesh Information Technology ( Electronic Service
Delivery) Rules, 201 7.
(2)They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.

2. Definitions .-
( 1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires. -
(a) "Act" means the Information Technology Act, 2000;
(b) "authorised agent " means an agent of the Authorised Service Provider and includes an
operator of an electronically enabled kiosk or front office who is permitted to deliver public
services to the users with the help of a comput er resource or any communication device, by
following the procedure specified u nder these rules;
(c) "Authorised Service Provider " means an agency including a body corporate or an Agency of
the Government, authorised by the Director of Electronic Service Delivery, to establish and
manage a system o f delivering services electronically, in accordance with these rules;
(d) "body corporate " means any company and includes a firm, sole proprietorship or other
association of individuals engaged in commercial or professional activities;
(e) "certificate " means a certificate required to be issued by an authority empowered under the
respective Act, rule, regulation or order of the Government to issue a certificate to confirm the
status. right or responsibility of a person, either natural or artificial, in accordance with any such
Act, rule, regulation or order of the Government and includes a certificate in electronic form
printed and delivered by an Authorised Service Provider with electronic signature on such
stationery as may be determined by the Directo r of Electronic Service Delivery;
(f) "Competent Authority " means the Secretaries to the Government, the Head of every
Department of the State Government and the Heads of Government Organisations and
Government Bodies, as notified by the State Government from time to time;
(g) Director of Electronic Service Delivery" means the official of the Government notified as the
Director of Electronic Service Delivery;

(h) "e-service ", means a service as may be specified by notification and delivered electronicall y to
the users;
(i) "electronic service delivery " means the delivery of public services in the form of receipt of
forms and applications, delivery of any license, permit, certificate, sanction or approval and the
receipt or payment of money by electronic means or any other such public service rendered b y
following the procedure specified under these rules;
(j) "Government " means the Government of Madhya Pradesh;
(k) "public service" means any service provided by the Government either through its Competent
Authorities or any of its agencies either direc tly or through any authorized service provider, which
shall include, inter alia, the receipt of forms and applications, delivery of any license, permit,
certificate, sanction or approval and the receipt or payment of money;
(l) "service charge " means the amount as may be specified by the Government to be payable to
the Authorised Service Provider for electronic delivery of services rendered and does not include
any duly authorised taxes, charges, dues or any other moneys due in respect of a ser vice payable
by any person to the Competent Authority concerned that are otherwise payable under the
respective Act, rule, regulation or order of the Government when making an application to the
concerned Competent Authority;
(m) "signing authority " means an authority empowered under the respective Act, rules,
regulations or order of the Government to issue any license, permit, certificate, sanction or
approval;
(n) "Specified " means specified by notification in the Official Gazette by the concerned
Government;
(o) “Electronic signature ” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by
means of the electronic technique in the second schedule and includes digita l signature.
(p) "State Electronic Records Repository " means an electronic repository of all electronically
signed records, maintained by Competent Authorities, for the purpose of accessing such records
and delivering them to the citizens.
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in these rules but defined in the Act shall have the
same meanings assigned to them in the Act.
3. System of Electronic Service Delivery. -
( 1) For the purpose of efficient de livery, the Government may authorise an Authorised Service
Provider to deliver public services through electronically enabled kiosks or any other mechanism for
electronic service delivery.
Explanation. - It is hereby clarified that the present rules provide for th e administration of e -service
delivery through Authorised Service Providers and authorised agents whereas other mechanisms of e service delivery such as State Online portal, Government departmental outlets and online services
provided to the users directly on the web shall be administered in the normal manner by the respective
Government departments and agencies.

(2) The form of application and the format of certificate issued under these rules in relation to any e service shall be such as may be specifie d by the Government.

4. Duty of the Competent Authority to notify the list of public services to be delivered through
electronic mode .-
(1) Every Competent Authority shall notify within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the
comi ng in to force of these rules ,-
(a) the public services of the department, agency or body which can be delivered through electronic
mode;
(b) the date by which each such service shall be made available through electronic mode;
(c) lay down norms for efficiency, quality and accuracy in the form of service levels; and
(d) the designated officers for delivery of each such service through electronic mode.
(2) The Competent Authority shall thereafter, review and update these public ations every year or as
frequently as required.

5. Notification of signing authorities. -
( 1) The Competent Authorities shall notify the list of signing authorities in respect of different public
services and local limits of their respective jurisdiction s in the State duly specifying the nature of such
service, the names of the signing authorities, the duration of the authority and the extent of jurisdiction
of each such authority.
(2) The Competent Authorities shall inform the Director of Electronic Service Delivery immediately
with respect to retirements, transfers, suspensions or termination from services of employees holding
positions of signing authorities.
(3) The sig ning authorities shall also inform their Competent Authorities immediately with respect to
their retirements, transfers, suspensions and terminations and the Competent Authorities shall get the
changes mentioned in clause (2) implemented in their respective application software.

6. Powers and F unctions of Director of Electronic Ser vice Delivery. -
(1) Collecting the list of all such services where provide the electronic before that rule & published
including service provider, process charge, legal fee, service provider system & source through delivered
service.
(2) The Director of Electronic Service Delivery shall discharge the following functions and powers,
namely: -
(a) to authorise, suspend or terminate the services of the Authorised Service Providers;
(b) to determine norms relating to the selection of authoris ed agents by the Authorised Service
Providers;
(c) to determine functions, responsibilities and liabilities of Authorised Service Providers and

authorised agents;
(d) to determine norms on the service levels to be complied with by the Authorised Service
Providers and authorised agents;
(e) to determine service charges to be charged by the Authorised Service Providers and authorised
agents for providing e -services;
(f) to determine terms and conditions relating to the authorisation, suspension or termina tion of the
services of the Authorised Service Providers and authorised agents; and
(g) to make alternative arrangements for delivery of e -services, in case of such suspension or
termination of services of Authorised Service Providers and authorised agent s.

7. Authorised Service Providers for Electronic Service Delivery. -
The Authorised Service Provider shall provide the notified public services electronically to the users in
conformity with these rules, by establishing appropriate delivery infrastructure and a network of
authorised agents, as determined by the Director of Electronic Service Delivery.

8. Appointment of authorised agents by the Authorised Service Provider -
(1) The Authorised Service Provider may appoint such number of Authorised Agents, as may be
required to deliver the services electronically to fulfil the norms of efficiency, quality and accuracy laid
down by the Competent Authority.
(2) The Authorised Service Provider shall ensure that he as well as all the authorised agents obtain
Digital Signature Certificates before they commence operations for delive ry of public service
electronically.
(3) The Authorised Service Provider may also impart appropriate training to the authorised agent to
impart them the skills required to deliver the electronic services efficiently and in an error -free manner.

9. Comme ncement of operations by Authorised Service Provider. -
The Authorised Service Provider shall commence its commercial operation for Electronic Service
Delivery only after -
(a) he has confirmed in writing or through e -mail duly signed by digital signature to the Director of
Electronic Service Delivery with respect to the adoption of procedures and standards specified under
these rules; and
(b) he has installed fac ilities and infrastructure needed for efficient delivery of electronic services and
in an err or-free manner in terms of norms laid down by the Director of Electronic Service Delivery and
confirm the same in writing or through e -mail duly signed by digital signature to the Director of
Electronic Service Delivery.

10. Authorised Service Provider t o collect service charge. -
(1) The application for an e -service submitted by a user to an Authorised Service Provider or an

authorised agent shall be accompanied by such service charge as may be determined by the Director of
Electronic Service Delivery which is payable in cash to the Authorised Service Provider, at the time of
making the application.
(2) The Director of Electronic Service Delivery may determine service charges by notification for e services.
(3) The service charges may be different for different e -services such as, -
(a) the status enquiry;
(b) print -outs related to e -services;
(c) the scanning of documents related to e -services;
(d) the acknowledgement receipt; and
(e) any other e -service.
(4) The service charge shall not include any duly authorised taxes, charges, dues or any other moneys
due in respect of a service payable by a ny person to the Competent Authority concerned that are
otherwise payable under the respective Act, rule, regulation or order of the Government when making
an application to the concerned Competent Authority.

11. Fee to be collected by service provider. -
(1) Any fee or duly authorised taxes, charges, dues or any other moneys due in respect of a service
payable by any person to the Competent Authority concerned that are otherwise payable under the
respective Act, rule, regulation or order of the Government when making an application to the
concerned Competent Authority, shall also be collected by the Authorised Service Provider or the
authorised agent as the case may be, except for those payments that are ordinarily required to be made
in the form of court fee stamps or treasury challans.
(2) The fee collected by the Authorised Service Provider or the authorised agent shall be remitted with
the Government treasury as may be determined by the Director of Electronic Service Delivery as the
case may be .

12. Remittance of service charge and fee by the service provider. -
(1) Out of the service charge collected by the Authorised Service Provider or the authorised agent for
an e-service, a percentage of the service charge as may be determined from time to time b y the
Director of Electronic Service Delivery may be apportioned to the Government.
(2) The share of the Government out of the service charge so collected shall be remitted by the
Authorised Service Provider or the authorised agent to Government treasury as may be determined by
the Director of Electronic Service Delivery.
13. Presumption with regard to service charge paid to service provider and other conditions of
obtaining e -services. -
(1) Where a ny person pays a service charge to an Authorised Service Provider or an authorised agent
in respect of any notified e -service, the print -out or the electronic prompt acknowledging the payment

in the relevant form and manner as may be determined by the Dire ctor of Electronic Service Delivery
and provided to such person by the Authorised Service Provider or authorised agent shall normally be
taken as proof of such payment and it shall be presumed that in normal circumstances the dues or
claims, for which the acknowledgement is purportedly issued,
have been satisfied to that extent.
(2) The payment of service charges to the Authorised Service Provider or the authorised agent shall by
no means create any right or title, temporary or permanent in nature in favour of a person conce rned
regarding obtaining the notified e -services.
(3) It would not be sufficient merely to make payment to all conditions associated with delivery of the
service are not met fully at the time of making payment to the Authorised Ser vice Provider or the
authorised agent.

14. Receipt or payment of money by or in favour of Government adopting the system of Electronic
Service Delivery -
The receipt or payment of money by or in favour of Government adopting the system of Electronic
Service Delivery shall be deemed to be a receipt or payment effected in compliance with the Financial
Code and Treasury Code of the Government.

15. Filing of form, application or any other document -
( 1) Any form, application or any other document referred to in clause (a) of sub -section (1) of section 6
of the Act may be filed with any office, authority, body, agency or Authorised Service Provider
authorised by the Government of Madhya Pradesh using the application software specified by it.
(2) The office, authority, agency or Authorised Service Provider referred to in sub -clause ( 1) shall,
while developing such software, take into account the following features of the electronic record,
namely: -
(a) life time;
(b) preservability;
(c) accessibility;
(d) readability;
(e) comprehensibi lity in respect of linked information;
(f) evidentiary value in terms of authenticity and integrity;
(g) controlled destructibility; and
(h) augmentability.

16. Issue or grant of any license, permit, sanction or approval. -
(1) Any license, permit, sanction or approval referred to in clause (b) of sub -section (1) of section 6 of
the Act may be issued or granted by using the application software specified under rule 15.
(2) The license, permit, certificate, sanction or approv al so issued shall be in the form prescribed in the
respective Act, rule, regulation or order and shall contain the name and designation of the signing
authority who had digitally signed and approved the electronic record along with the date and time of
creation of such record.

17. Creation of repository of digitally signed electronic records. -
(1) The Competent Authorities may, as soon as, after the coming into effect of these rules create,
establish and maintain a repository and database of digitally s igned electronic records together with the
associated application software and workflow to enable Authorised Service Providers or the authorised
agents to access such licenses, permits, certificates, sanctions or approvals, as the case may be, and
deliver them to the user.
(2) The relevant security procedures, as specified by the Government, shall be followed by such
Competent Authorities, in respect of the electronic data, information, applications, repository of
digitally signed electronic records and in formation technology assets under their respective control .

18. Procedure for making changes in a repository of digitally signed electronic records. -
( 1) Any Competent Authority or any signing authority, either suo motu, or on an application by an
interested party, may make or order to make an appropriate change in a repository of digitally signed
electronic records, after following the procedure prescribed in the respective Act, rule, regulation or
order.
(2) Any such au thority shall have privileges for making or ordering changes on ly in respect of the
electronic records pertaining to its own jurisdiction.
(3) Any change effected to any record in a repository of digitally signed electronic records, and any
addition or de letion of a record from such repository of electronic records shall invariably be digitally
signed by the respective authority and an electronic audit trail of all such changes shall be maintained.

19. Creation of secure application software for Electron ic Service Delivery .-
(1) The Competent Authorities shall get appropriate application software created, using which, the
Signing Authorities, shall digitally sign the license, permit certificate, sanction or approvals, and get
the same audited by a third p arty agency, so as to ensure its security, reliability, performance and
consistency, before it is deployed.
(2) Every such application software shall, inter alia, possess the capability to assign a unique
identification to each license, permit, certificate, sanction or approval.
(3) Every Authorised Service Provider shall create its own application software in consultation with
the respective Competent Authorities, which shall enable such Authorised Service Providers to deliver

electronic services in accordance with these rules.
(4) Every such application software created either by the Competent Authority or the Authorised
Service Provider shall, inter alia, possess the following features and capabilities, namely: -
a) secure Login of Authorised Agents, as are required to access the application system, through use
of Digital Signature Certificates;
b) secure access of Authorised Agents, to the repositories of digi tally signed electronic records
maintained by the Competent Authorities, for printing and delivery of the digitally signed
license, permit, certificate, sanction or approvals; and
c) to assign an unique identification to the voucher or receipt issued by any authorised agent while
providing electronic services to the citizens.
(5) The Director of Electronic Service Delivery shall get such application software audited by a third
party agency, as to ensure its security, reliability, performance and consistency, before it is deployed
by the Authorised Service Provider and also as and when changes are made in the application software.

20. Delivery of e-Services by the Authorised Service Provider or Authorised Agent. -
(1) On a request made by a use f or provision of a service, relating to the issue of any license, permit,
certificate, sanction or approval and to the receipt or payment of money, the Authorised Service
Provider or the authorised agent shall access the respective departmental repository of digitally sign ed
electronic records through their secured application specified in rule 19, in respect of any license,
permit, certificate or approval or the database in respect of any payment or receipt
(2) The Authorised Service Provider or the authorised agent shall be permitted to have such access
only with the use of its digital signature certificate.
(3) The Authorised Service Provider or the authorised agent shall accept the specified fees, tax, duty or
payment along with the service charge, down load the relate d license, permit, certificate, sanction or
approval or the database record relating to any payment or receipt, print the license, permit, certificate,
sanction or approval from the repository of digitally signed electronic records, or the payment voucher
or receipt from the relevant database, and print the document using the secure application software
and the secure stationery.

21. Verification of Digitally Signed documents. -
(1) The Competent Authorities shall cause to be created a system (portal /website) of online
verification of any license, permit, certificate, sanction, approval or receipt delivered by any
Authorised Service Provider or the authorised agent or the State Electronic Records Repository.
(2) Any person or authority, desirous of ve rifying the authenticity of any document or certificate issued
under these rules. may access such portal or the website using the unique identification printed on the
document sought to be verified.

22. Audit of the Information Systems and Accounts of Authorised Service Provider and authorised

agents. -
( 1) The Director of Electronic Service Delivery shall cause an audit to be conducted of the records
and accounts of the Authorised Service Providers a nd their authorised agents in the State at such
intervals as deemed necessary by an agency empanelled as an information security auditing
organization.
(2) The audit referred to in sub -rule (I) may cover aspects such as security, confidentiality and priva cy
of information, the functiona lity and performance of any application software used in the electronic
delivery of services and the accuracy of accounts kept by the Authorised Service Providers and their
authorised agents.
(3) It shall be incumbent on th e Authorised Service Provider and their authorised agents to provide
such information and assistance to the audit agencies appointed by the Director of Electronic Service
Delivery to comply with the directions given by the audit agencies and to rectify the defects and
deficiencies pointed out by the audit agencies.

23. Use of special stationery in Electronic Service Delivery .-
( 1) The special stationery used by the Authorised Service Providers and its agents for delivery of the
services shall be determined by the Director of Electronic Service Delivery with accompanying
security features for forms, applications, licenses, permi ts, certificates, receipts of payment and such
other documents as part of the Electronic Service Delivery.
(2) The certificates, licenses and permits shall carry a declaration in the format as may be determined
by the Director of Electronic Service Delive ry.

24. Repeal And Saving :
(1) The Madhya Pradesh Information Technology (Regulation of Electronic Delivery of Citizen
Services and Appointment of Service Provider) Rules, 2011 are hereby repealed.
(2) Notwith standing the repeal of the said rules, anything done or any action taken under the
said rules shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of
these rules.

----------------