AN
ACT

to make a provision for levy and collection of tax on intra -State supply of
goods or services or both by the State of Uttarakhand and the matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto

BE it en acted by Legislature of Uttarakhand in the Sixty -eighth Year of the
Republic of India as follows: -

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.
(1) This Act may be called the Uttarakhand Goods and Services Tax Act,
.
(2) It extends to the whole of the Uttarakhand
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of
this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commen cement of this
Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision
[(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, -
(a) the provisions mentioned in section. 2, 12 and 14 shall be deemed to have come into force on
the 30th day o f June, 2020;
(b) the provisions mentioned in section. 11 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th
day of May, 2020;
(c) the provisions mentioned in section. 13 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st
day of March, 2020;
(d) the pr ovisions mentioned in section. 3 to 10 and section 15 shall come into force on such date
as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of th is Act and any
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the
coming into force of that provision].
[(a) the provisions mentioned in section 6 shall be deemed to have been come into force on the
01st day of June 2021.
(b) the provisions mentioned in section 4 and 5 shall be deemed to have been come into force on
the 01day of August 2021.
(c) The provisions mentioned in section 2,3 and section 7 to 15 shall come into force on such date
as the State Government may by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.]
Short title,
extent and
commencem ent.
------------------------------------------------------------------
1. See section 1 of Utt arakhand. Act no. 25 of 2020.
2. See section 1 of UK Act no 22 o f 2021.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, –– Definitions.

of
1882. (1)“actionable claim” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
(2) “address of delivery” means the address of the recipient of goods
or services or both indicated on the tax invoice issued by a registered
person for delivery of such goods or services or both ;

(3) “address on record” means the address of the recipient as available
in the records of the supplier;
(4) “adjudicating authority” means any a uthority, appointed or
authorised to pass any order or decision under this Act, but does not
include the Commissioner , Revisional Authority, the Autho rity for
Advance Ruling, [the National Appellate Authority for Advance
Ruling] , [the Appellate Authority, the Appellate Tribunal and The
Authority referred to in subsection (2) of section 171] ;

(5) “agent” means a person , including a factor, broker , commission
agent, arhatia , del credere agent, an auctioneer or any other mercantile
agent, by whatever name called, who carries on the business of supply
or receipt of goods or services or both on behalf of another;

2. inserted. by section 2 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 13 of 2019.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6) “aggregate turnover” means the aggregate value of all
taxable supplies (excluding the v alue of inward supplies on
which tax is payable by a person on reverse charge basis) ,
exempt supplies, exports of goods or services or both and
inter -State supplies of person s having the same Permanent
Account Number , to be computed on all India basis but
excludes central tax, State tax, Union territory tax, integrated
tax and cess ;

(7) “agriculturist” means an individual or a Hindu
Undivided Family who undertakes cultivation of land –
(a) by own labour, or
(b) by the labour of family, or
(c) by servant s on wages payable in cash or kind or by hired
labour under personal supervision or the personal supervision of
any member of the family;
(8) “Appellate Authority” means an authority appointed or
authorised to hear appeals as referred to in section 107;

(9) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Goods and Services
Tax Appe llate Tribunal reffered to in section 109;
(10) “appointed day” means the date on which the
provisions of this Act shall come into force ;

(11) “assessment” means determination o f tax liability
under this Act and includes self -assessment, re -assessment,
provisional assessment, summary assessment and best
judgement assessment;

of 1961. (12) "associated enterprise s" shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in section 92A of the Income -tax Act, 1961;

(13) “audit” means the examination of records, returns and
other documents maintained or furnished by the registered
person under this Act or the rules made thereunder or under
any other law for the time being in forc e to verify the
correctness of turnover declared, taxes paid, refund claimed
and input tax credit availed, and to assess his compliance
with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(14) “authoris ed bank” shall mean a bank or a branch of a
bank authorised by the Central Government to collect the tax
or any other amo unt payable under this Act;
(15)“authoris ed representative” means the representative as
referred to under section 116;

of 1963. (16) “Board” means [the Central Board of Indirect taxes
and Customs ] constituted under the Central Boards o f
Revenue Act, 1963 ;
(17) “business ” includes ––
(a) any trade, commerce, manufacture, profession, vocation ,
adventure, wager or any other similar activity, whether or not it
is for a pecuniary benefit;
(b) any activity or transaction in connection with or
incidental or ancillary to sub-clause (a);
(c) any activity or transaction in the nature of sub-clause (a),
whether or not there is volume, frequency, continuity or
regularity of such transaction;
(d) supply or acquisition of goods including capital goods
and services in connection with commencement or closure of
business;
(e) provision by a club, association, society, or any such
body (for a subscription or any other consideration) of the
facilities or benefits to its members;
(f) admission, for a consideration, of person s to any
premises;
(g) services supplied by a person as the holder of an office
which has b een accepted by him in the course or furtherance of
his trade, profession or vocation;
[(h) activities of a race club including by way of
totalisator or a license to book maker or activities of a
licens ed book maker in such club; and]
(i) any activ ity or transaction undertaken by the Central
Government, a State Government or any local authority in which
they are engaged as public authorities ;
[****]
--------------------------------------
Omitted. by section 2 (d ) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
Explanation .––For the purposes of this clause, f actors that
should be cons idered in determining whether goods or services
are related include ––
(a) the nature of the goods or services;
(b) the nature of the production processes;
(c) the type or class of customers for the goods or
services;
(d) the methods used to distribute the goods or supply of
services; and
(e) the nature of regulatory environment (wherever
applicable ), including banking, insurance or public utilities;
(19) “capital goods” means goods, the value of which is
capitalised in the books of acc ount of the person claiming
the input tax credit and which are used or intended to be
used in the course or furtherance of business;
(20) “casual taxable person” means a person who
occasionally undertakes transactions involving supply of
goods or servi ces or both in the course or furtherance of
business , whether as principal, agent or in any other
capacity, in the taxable territory where he has no fixed
place of business;
(21) “central tax” means the central goods and services
tax levied under sectio n 9 of the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act ;
(22) “cess” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States)
Act;

of 1949. (23) “Chartered A ccountant” means a chartered
accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
(24) [“Commissioner” means the Commissioner of State
tax appointed under section 3 and includes the Principal
Commissioner or Chief Commissioner of State tax
appointed u nder Section 3 ;]
(25) “Commissioner in the Board” means the
Commissioner referred to in section 168 of the Central
Goods and Services Tax Act ;
-------------------------------------

The Uttarakh and Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(26) “common portal” means the common goods and services tax
electronic portal referred to in section 146;
(27) “common working days” shall mean such days in succession
which are not declared as gazetted holidays b y the Central
Government or the Government of Uttarakhand ;

of
1980. (28) "company secretary" means a company secretary as defined in
clause (c) of sub -section (1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries
Act, 1980;
(29) “competent authority ” mean s such authority as may be notified
by the Government;
(30) “composite supply” means a supply made by a taxable person
to a recipient consisting of two or more taxable supplies of goods or
services or both , or any combination thereof, which are naturall y
bundled and supplied in conjunction with each other in the ordinary
course of business , one of which is a principal supply;
Illustration : Where goods are packed, and transported with insurance, the
supply of goods, packing materials, transport and i nsurance is a composite
supply and supply of goods is a principal supply.
(31) “consideration” in relation to the supply of goods or services or
both includes ––
(a) any payment made or to be made, whether in money or otherwise,
in respect of, in resp onse to, or for the inducement of, the supply of
goods or services or both, whether by the recipient or by any other
person but shall not include any subsidy given by the Central
Government or a State Government;
(b) the monetary value of any act or fo rbearance, in respect of, in
response to, or for the inducement of, the supply of goods or services or
both, whether by the recipient or by any other person but shall not
include any subsidy given by the Central Government or a State
Government:
Provid ed that a deposit given in respect of the supply of goods or
services or both shall not be considered as payment made for such supply
unless the supplier applies such deposit as consideration for the said
supply;
(32) “con tinuous supply of goods” means a supply of goods which
is provided, or agreed to be provided, continuously or on recurrent
basis, under a contract, whether or not by means of a wire, cable,
pipeline or other conduit, and for which the supplier invoices the
recipient on a regular or per iodic basis and includes supply of such
goods as the Government may, subject to such condition s, as it may,
by notification, specify;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(33) “continuous supply of services” means a supply of
services which is provided, or agreed to be provided,
continuously or on recurrent basis, under a contract, for a period
exceeding three months with periodic payment obligations and
includes supply of such services as the Government may,
subject to such condition s, as i t may , by notification, specify;
(34) “conveyance” includes a vessel, an aircraft and a vehicle;
of 1959. (35) “cost accountant” means a cost accounta nt as defined in
[clause (b)] of sub -section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and
Works Accountants A ct, 1959;
(36) “Council” means the Goods and Services Tax Council
established under article 279A of the Constitution;
(37) “credit note” means a document issued by a registe red
person under sub -section (1 ) of section 34;
(38) “debit note” means a document issued by a regist ered
person under sub -section ( 3) of section 34;
(39) “deemed exports” means such supplies of goods as may
be notified under section 147 ;
(40) “designated authority” means such authority as may be
notified by the Commissio ner;
of 2000. (41) “document” includes written or printed record of any sort
and electronic record as defined in clause ( t) of section 2 of the
Information Technology Act, 2000;
(42) “drawback” in relation to any goods manufactured in
India and exp orted, means the rebate of duty, tax or cess
chargeable on any imported inputs or on any domestic inputs or
input services used in the manufacture of such goods;
(43) “electronic cash ledger” means the electronic cash ledg er
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 49 ;
(44) “electronic commerce” means the supply of goods or
services or both , including digital products over digital or
electronic network;
(45) “electronic commerce operator” means any person who
owns, operates or manages digital or electronic facility or
platform for electronic commerce;
(46) “electronic credit ledger” means the electronic credit
ledger referred to in sub -section (2 ) of section 49;
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(47) “exempt supply” means supply of any goods or services or both
which attract s nil rate of tax or which may be wholly exempt from tax
under sec tion 11, or under section 6 of the Integrated Goods and
Services Tax Act, and includes non -taxable supply;
(48) “existing law” means any law, notification, order, rule or
regulation relating to levy and collection of duty or tax on goods or
services or both passed or made before the commencement of this Act
by the Legislature or any Authority or person having the power to
make such law, notification, order, rule or regulation ;
(49) “family” means, —
(i) the spouse and children of the person, and
the pare nts, grand -parents, brothers and sisters of the person if they
are wholly or mainly dependent on the said person;
(50) fixed establishment” means a place (other than the registered
place of business) which is characterised by a sufficient degree of
permanence and suitable structure in terms of human and technical
resources to supply services, or to receive and use services for its own
needs;
(51) “Fund” means the Consumer Welfare Fu nd established under
(52) “goods’’ means every kind of movable property other than
money and securities but includes actionable claim, growing crops,
grass and things attached to or forming part of the land which are
agreed to be severed before supply or under a contract of supply;
(53) “Government” means the Government of Uttarakhand
(54) “Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act” means
the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, 2017;
(55) “goods and services tax p ractitioner" means any person who has
been approved under sect ion 48 to act as such p ractitioner;
of
(56) "India" means the territory of India as referred to in article 1 of
the Constitution, its territorial waters, seabed and sub -soil underlying
such waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone or an y other
maritime zone as referred to in the Territorial Waters, Continental
Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 ,
and the air space above its territory and territorial waters;
(57) “Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act” mea ns the Integrated
Goods and Services Tax Act , 2017 ;
(58) “integrated tax” means the integrated goods and services tax
levied under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(59) “input” means any go ods other than capital goods used or intended
to be used by a supplier in the course or furtherance of business;
(60) “input service” means any service used or intended to be used by a
supplier in the course or furtherance of business;
(61) “Input Service Distributor” means an office of the supplier of goods
or services or both which receives tax invoices issued under section 31
towards the receipt of input services and issues a prescribed document for
the purposes of distributing the credit of cent ral tax, State tax , integrated
tax or U nion territory tax paid on the said services to a supplier of taxable
goods or services or both having the same Permanent Account Number as
that of the said office;
(62) “input tax” in relation to a registered pers on, means the central tax,
State tax, integrated tax or U nion territory tax charged on any supply of
goods or services or both made to him and includes –
(a) the integrated goods and services tax charged on import of goods;
(b) the tax payable under the pr ovisions of sub-section s (3) and (4) of section
9;
(c) the tax payable under the provisions of sub -section s (3) and (4) of section 5
of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act ; or
(d) the tax payable under the provisions of sub-section s (3) and (4) of s ection 9
of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act,

but does not include the tax paid under the composition levy ;
(63) “input tax credit ” means the credit of input tax ;
(64)“intra -State supply of goods” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 8 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;
(65) “intra -State supply of services” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 8 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;
(66) “invoice” or “tax invoice” means the tax invoice referred to in

(67) “inward supply” in relation to a person, shall mean receipt of goods
or services or both whether by purchase, acquisition or any other means ,
with or without consideration ;
(68) “job work” means any treatmen t or process undertaken by a person
on goods belonging to a nother registered person and the expression “job
worker” shall be construed accordingly;
(69) “local authority” means ––
(a) a “Panchayat” as defined in clause (d) of article 243 of the
Consti tution;
(b) a “Municipality” as defined in clause (e) of article 243P of

the Constitution;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(c) a Municipal Committee, a Zilla Parishad, a District
Board, and any other authority legally entitled to, or entrusted
by the Central Government or any State Government with the
control or management of a municipal or local fund;

of 2006. (d) a Cantonment Board as defined in section 3 of the
Cantonments Act, 2006;
(e) a Regional Council or a District Council constituted
under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution;
(f) a Development Board constituted under [and article
j] of the Constitution; or
(g) a Regional Council constituted under article 371A of
the Constitution;
(70) “location of the recipient of services” means, -
(a) where a su pply is received at a place of business for
which the registration has been obtained, the location of such
place of business;
(b) where a supply is received at a place other than the
place of business for w hich registration has been obtained (a
fixed establishment elsewhere ), the location of such fixed
establishment;
(c) where a supply is received at more than one
establishment, whether the place of business or fixed
establishment, the location of the establ ishment most directly
concerned with the receipt of the supply; and
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual
place of residence of the recipient;
(71) “location of the supplier of services” means, -
(a) where a supply is made from a plac e of business for
which the registration has been obtained, the location of such
place of business;
(b) where a supply is made from a place other than the
place of business for which registration has been obtained (a
fixed establishment elsewhere ), the loc ation of such fixed
establishment;
(c) where a supply is made from more than one
establishment, whether the place of business or fixed
establishment, the location of the establishment most directly
concerned with the provisions of the supply; and
(d) in ab sence of such places, the location of the usual
place of residence of the supplier;

Inserted. by section 2 (f) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(72) “manufacture” means processing of raw material o r inputs in any
manner that results in emergence of a new product having a distinct name,
character and use and the term “manufacturer” shall be construed
accordingly;
(73) “market value” shall mean the full amount which a recipient of a
supply is requi red to pay in order to obtain the goods or services or both of
like kind and quality at or about the same time and at the same commercial
level where the recipient and the supplier are not related;
(74) “mixed supply” means two or more individual suppli es of goods or
services, or any combination thereof, made in conjunction with each other
by a taxable person for a single price where such supply does no t constitute
a composite supply.
Illustration : A supply of a package consisting of canned foods, swe ets, chocolates,
cakes, dry fruits, aerated drink s and fruit juices when supplied for a single price is
a mixed supply. Each of these items can be supplied separately and is not
dependent on any other. It shall not be a mixed supply if these items are supp lied
separately;

(75) “money” means the Indian legal tender or any foreign currency,
cheque, promissory note, bill of exchange, letter of credit, draft, pay order,
trave ller cheque, money order, postal or electronic remittance or any other
instrume nt recognized by the Reserve Bank of India when used as a
consideration to settle an obligation or exchange with Indian legal tender of
another denomination but shall not include any currency that is held for its
numismatic value;
of
1988. (76) “motor vehicle” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (28) of section 2 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988;
(77) “non -resident taxable person” means a ny person who occasionally
undertakes transactions involving supply of goods or services or bo th,
whether as principal or agent or in any other capacity , but who has no fixed
place of business or residence in India ;
(78) “non -taxable supply’’ means a supply of goods or services or both
which is not leviable to tax under this Act or under the Int egrated Goods
and Services Tax Act ;
(79) “non -taxable territory” means the territory which is outside the
taxable territory;
(80) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette
and the expressions ‘notify’ and ‘notified’ shall be construed accordingly;
(81) “other territory” includes territories other than those comprising in a
State and those referred to in sub-clauses (a) to (e) of clause ( 114);

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(82) “output tax” in rela tion to a taxable person, means the tax chargeable
under this Act on taxable supply of goods or services or both made by him or
by his agent but excludes tax payable by him on reverse charge basis;
(83) “outward supply” in relation to a taxable person, means supply of goods
or services or both, whether by sale, transfer, barter, exchange, licence, rental,
lease or disposal or any other mode, made or agreed to be made by such
person in the course or furtherance of business;

of
2013. (84) “person” includes —
(a) an individual;
(b) a Hindu Undivided Family;
(c) a company;
(d) a firm;
(e) a Limited Liability Partnership;
(f) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or
not, in India or outside India;
(g) any corporation established by or under any Central Act, State Act or
Provincial Act or a Government company as defined in clause (45) of section 2 of
the Companies Act, 2013;
(h) anybody corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a country outside
India;
(i) a co -operative society registered under any law relating to co -operative
societies;
(j) a local authority;
(k) Central Government or a State Government;
of
1860. (l) society as defined under the Societies Registration Act, 1860;
(m) trust; and
(n) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the above;
(85) “place of business” includes ––
(a) a place from where the business is ordinarily carried on, and includes a
warehouse, a godown or any other place where a taxable person stores his goods,
supplies or receive s goods or services or both; or
(b) a place where a taxable person maintains his books of account; or
(c) a place where a taxable person is engaged in business through an a gent, by
whatever name called;
(86) “place of supply” means the place of supply as referred to in Chapter V
of the Integrated Good s and Services Tax Act;
(87) “prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act on the
recommendations of the Council;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(88) “principal” means a person on whose behalf an agent carries on
the business of supply or receipt of goods or services or both;
(89) “principal place of business” means the place of business
specified as the principal place o f business in the certificate of
registration;
(90) “principal supply” means the supply of goods or services which
constitutes the predominant element of a composite supply and to
which any other supply forming part of that composite supply is
ancillary ;
(91) “proper officer” in relation to any function to be performed
under this Act, means the Commissioner or the officer of the State tax
who is assigned that function by the Commissioner ;
(92) “quarter” shall mean a period comprising three consecut ive
calendar months, ending on the last day of March, June, September and
December of a calendar year;
(93) “recipient” of supply of goods or services or both, means —
(a) where a consideration is payable for the supply of goods or services
or both, the person who is liable to pay that consideration;
(b) where no consider ation is payable for the supply of goods, the
person to whom the goods are delivered or made available, or to whom
possession or use of the goods is given or made available; and
(c) where no consideration is payable for the supply of a service, the
person to whom the service is rendered,

and any reference to a person to whom a supply is made shall be construed as
a reference to the recipient of the supply and shall include an agent acting as
such on behalf of the recipient in relation to the goods or services or both
supplied;
(94) “registered person” means a person who is registered under
Number.
(95) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Government
under this Act on the recommendations of the Council;
(96) “removal’’ in relation to goods, means -
(a) despatch of the goods for delivery by the supplier thereof or by any
other person acting on behalf of such supplier; or
(b) collection of the goods by the recipient thereof or by any other
person acting on behalf of such recipient;

(97) “return” means any return prescribed or otherwise required to be
furnished by or under this Act or the rules made thereunder;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(98) “reverse charge’’ means the liability to pay tax by the recipient
of supply of goods or services or both instead of the supplier of such
goods or services or both under sub-section (3 ) or sub-section (4) of
the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;
(99) “Revisional Authority” means an authority appointed or
authorise d for revision of decision or o rders as referred to in section
108;
(100) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to this Act;
of
1956. (101) “securities” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (h) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,
1956;
(102) “services” means anything other than goods, money and
securities but includes activities relating to the use of money or its
conversion by cash or by any other mode , from one form, currency or
denomination, to another form, currency or denomination for which a
separate consideration is charged;
[Explanation - For the removal of doubts, It is hereby clarified that the
expression “services” includes facilitatin g or arranging transaction in
securitie s]
(103) “State” means the State of Uttarakhand ;
(104) “State tax” means the tax levied under this Act ;
(105) “supplier” in relation to any goods or services or both, shall
mean the person supplying the said goods or services or both and
shall include an agent acting as such on behalf of such supplier in
relation to the goods or services or both supplied;
(106) “tax period’’ means the period for which the return is required
to be furnished ;
(107) “taxable person” means a person who is registered or liable to
be registered under sect ion 22 or section 24 ;
(108) “taxable supply’’ means a supply of goods or services or both
which is leviable to tax under this Act;
(109) “taxable territory’’ means the territory to which the provisions
of this Act apply;

Inserted. by section 2 (g) of Uttrakhand Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(110) “telecommunication service” means service of any
description (including electronic mail, voice mail, data services,
audio text services, video text se rvices, radio paging and cellular
mobile telephone services) which is made available to users by
means of any transmission or reception of signs, signals, writing,
images and sounds or intelligence of any nature, by wire, radio,
visual or other electromagn etic means;
(111) “the Central Goods and Services Tax Act” means the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017;
(112) “turnover in State” or “turnover in Union territory”
means the aggregate value of all taxable supplies (excluding the
value of inward supplies on which tax is payable by a person on
reverse charge basis) and exempt supplies made within a State or
Union territory by a taxable person, exports of goods or services
or both and inter -State supplies of goods or services or both made
from the State or Union territory by the said taxable person but
excludes central tax, State tax, Union territory tax, integrated tax
and cess;
(113) “usual place of residence” means ––
(a) in case of an individual, the place where he ordinarily
resides;
(b) in other cases, the place where the person is incorporated or
otherwise legally constituted;
(114) “Union territory” means the territory of, -
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(b) Laksh adweep;
(c) [Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu ;
(d) Ladakh ;]
(e) Chandi garh; and
(f) other territory;
Explanation . - For the purposes of this Act, each of the
territories specified in sub -clauses (a) to (f) shall be considered
to be a separate Union territory.
(115) “Union territory tax” means the Union t erritory goods
and ser vices tax le vied under the Union Territory Goods and
Services T ax Act;
(116) “Union Territory Goods and S ervices T ax Act” means the
Union Territory Goods and Services T ax Act, 2017;

------------------
substituted. by section 2 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(117) “valid return” means a return furnished under sub section ( 1) of section 39 on which self -assessed tax has been
paid in full;
(118) “voucher” means an instrument where there is an
obligation to accept it as consideration or part consideration
for a supply of goods or services or both and where the goods
or services or both to be supplied or the identities of their
potential suppliers are either indicated on the instrument itself
or in related documentation, including the terms and
conditions of use of such instrument ;
(119 ) “works contract” means a contract for building,
construction, fabrication, completion, erection, installation,
fitting out, improvement, modification, repair, maintenance,
renovation, alteration or commissioning of any immovable
property wherein transfer of property in goods (whether as
goods or in some other form) is involved in the execution of
such contract ;
(120 ) words and expressions used and not defin ed in this Act
but defined in the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act , the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act, the Union Territory
Goods and Services Tax Act and the Goods and Services Tax
(Compensation to States) Act shall have the same meanings as
assigned to them in those Act s.
CHAPTER II
ADMINISTRATION
3. The Government shall, by notification , appoint the following classes
of officers for the purposes of this Act, namely: –– Officers
under this
Act.
List is
indicative (a) Principal Commissioner or Chief Commissioner of State
tax,
(b) Commissioner of State Tax,
(c) Special Commissioners of State tax,
(d) Additional Commissioners of State tax,
(e) Joint Commissioners of State tax,
(f) Deputy Commissioners of State tax,
(g) Assistant Commissioners of State tax, and
(h) any other class of officers as it may deem fit:
-- of -- Provided that, the officers appointed under the Uttarakhand Value
Added Tax Act, 2005 shall be deemed to be the officers appointed
under the provisions of this Act .
4. (1) The Government may, in addition t o the officers as may be
notified under section 3, appoint such persons as it may think fit to
be the officers under this Act . Appointment
of officers .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(2) The Commissioner shall have jurisdiction over t he whole
of the State, the Special Commissioner and an Additional
Commissioner in respect of all or any of the functions assigned
to them, shall have jurisdiction over the whole of the State or
where the State Government so directs, over any local area
thereof, and all other officers shall, subject to such conditions as
may be specified, have jurisdiction over the whole of the State
or over such local areas as the Commissioner may, by order,
specify .
5. (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as t he Commissioner
may impose, an officer of State tax may exercise the powers and
discharge the duties conferred or imposed on him under this Act . Powers of
officers.
(2) An officer of State tax may exercise the powers and
discharge the duties conferred or imposed under this Act on any
other officer of State tax who is subordinate to him .
(3) The Commissioner may, subject to such conditions and
limitations as may be specified in this behalf by him, delegate
his powers to any other officer who is subordi nate to him.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an
Appellate Authority shall not exercise the powers and discharge
the duties conferred or imposed on any other officer of State tax.
6. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions o f this Act, the officers
appointed under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act are
authorised to be the proper officers for the purposes of this Act,
subject to such conditions as the Government shall, on the
recommendations of the Council, by notificatio n, specify. [Authorisatio n of officers of
central tax as
proper o fficer
in certain
circumstances ]
[(2) Subject to the conditions specified in the notification
issued under sub -section (1), -
(a) where any proper officer issues an order under this Ac t, he
shall also issue an order under the Central Goods and Services
Tax Act, as authorised by the said Act under intimation to the
jurisdictional officer of central tax;
(b) where a proper officer under the Central Goods and Services Tax
Act has initiate d any proceedings on a subject matter, no proceedings
shall be initiated by the proper officer under this Act on the same
subject matter.
(3) Any proceedings for rectification, appeal and revision, wherever
applicable, of any order passed by an officer ap pointed under this Act ,
shall not lie before an officer appointed under the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act. ]2
----------------- ------------------------------- ------
1. Substituted by section 3 of Uk.Act no 13 of 2019.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Servic es Tax Act, 2017
CHAPTER III
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAX
7. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the expression “supply” includes –– Scope of
supply.
(a) all forms of supply of goods or services or both such as sale,
transfer, barter, exchange, license, r ental, lease or disposal made or
agreed to be made for a consideration by a person in the course or
furtherance of business;
[(aa) the activities or transactions, by a person, other than an
individual, to its members or constituents or vice -versa, for cas e,
deferred payment or other valuable consideration;
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified
that, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force or any judgment, decree or order of any Court, t ribunal
of authority, the person and its members or constituents shall be
deemed to be two separate persons and the supply of activities or
transactions inter se shall be deemed to take place from one such
person to another. ]
(b) import of services for a consideration whether or not in the
course or furtherance of business [and] ;
(c) the activities specified in Schedule I, made or agreed to be made
without a consideration; [***]
(d) [***]
[(IA) where certain activities or transaction constitute a supp ly in
accordance with the provision or transactions constitute a supply in
accordance with the provisions of sub -section (1), they shall be treated
either as supply of good or supply of services as referre d to in schedule
II.]
(2) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in sub -section (1 ), ––
(a) activities or transactions specified in Schedule III; or
(b) such activities or transactions undertaken by the Central
Government, a State Government or any local authority in
which they are engaged as public authorities, as may be
notified by the Government on the recommendations of the
Council,
shall be treated neither as a supply of goods nor a supply of services.
-------------------- ------------------------------------------- -----
1- Inserted by section 3 (a) (i) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2- Omitted by section 3 (a) (ii) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
–Omitted by section 3 (a) (iii) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
–Inserted by section 3 (b) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(3) Subject to the provisions of [sub-sections ( 1), (1A) and ( 2)], the
Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
specify, by notification, the transactions that are to be treated as —
(a) a supply of goods and not as a supply of services; or
(b) a supply of services and not as a supply of goods
8. The tax liability on a composite or a mixed supply shall be determined
in the following manner, namely: — Tax liability
on composite
and mixed
supplies.
(a) a composite supply comprising two or more supplies, one of which
is a principal supply, shall be treated as a supply of such principal
supply; and
(b) a mixed supply comprising two or more supplies shall be treated as
a supply of that particular supply which attracts the highest rate of
tax.
9. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (2), t here shall be levied a
tax called the Uttarakhand Goods And S ervices Tax on all intra -State
supplies of goods or services or both , except on the supply of
alcohol ic liquor for human consumption, on the value determined
under section 15 and at such rates, not exceeding twenty per cent ., as
may be notified by the Government on the recommendation s of the
Council and collected in such manner as may be prescribed and shall
be paid by the taxable person . Levy and
collection .
(2) The State tax on the supply of petroleum crude, high speed
diesel, motor spirit (commonl y known as petrol), natural gas and
aviation turbine fuel, shall be levied with effect from such date
as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations
of the Council.
(3) The Government may, on the recommendations of the
Council, by notification, specify categories of supply of goods
or service s or both, the tax on which shall be paid on reverse
charge basis by the recipient of such goods or services or both
and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient as
if he is the person liable for paying the tax in relation to the
supply of such goods or services or both.
[(4) The Government may, on the recommendation of the Council,
by notification, specify a class of registered persons who shall, in
respect of supply of specified categories of doods or services or both
received fro m an unregistered supplier, pay the tax on reverse charge
basis as the recipient of such supply of goods or services or both. ]
-----------------------------------
2- Substituted by section 4 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(5) The Government may, on the recommendations of the
Council, by notification, specify categories of services the tax
on intra -State supplies of which shall be pai d by the electronic
commerce operator if such services are supplied through it, and
all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such electronic
commerce operator as if he is the supplier liable for paying the
tax in relation to the supply of such service s:
Provided that where an electronic commerce operator does not
have a physical presence in the taxable territory, any person
representing such electronic commerce operator for any purpose in
the taxable territory shall be liable to pay tax:

Provi ded further that where an electronic commerce operator does
not have a physical presence in the taxable territory and also, he does
not have a representative in the said territory, such electronic
commerce operator shall appoint a person in the taxable ter ritory for
the purpose of paying tax and such person shall be liable to pay tax.

10. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act but
subject to the provisions of sub-section s (3) and (4) of section 9, a
registered person, whose aggregate turnover in the preceding financial
year did not exceed fifty lakh rupees may opt to pay , [in lieu of the
tax payable by him under sub -section (1) of section 9, an amount of
tax calculated at such rate ] as may be prescribed, but not exceeding , - Composition
levy.
(a) one per cent. of the turnover in State in case of a
manufacturer,
(b) two and a half per cent. of the turnover in State in case
of persons engaged in making supplies referred to in
clause (b) of paragraph 6 of Schedule II, and
(c) half per cent. of the turnover in State in case of other
suppliers,
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed :
Provided that the Government may , by notification, increase
the said limit of fifty lakh rup ees to such higher amount, no t
exceeding [one crore fifty lakh rupees ], as may be recommended by
the Council.

------------------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 5 (a) (i) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2- Substituted by section 5 (a) (ii) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
[Provided further that a person who opts to pay tax under
clause (a) or clause (b) of Paragraph 6 of Schedule II), of value
not exceeding ten percent of turnover in the State in the
Preceding Financial Year or five la kh ru pees, whichever is
higher.]
[Explanation - For the purposes of second proviso, the value of
exempt supply of services provided by way of extending deposits,
loans or advances in so far as the consideration is represe nted by way
of interest or discount shall not be taken into account for determining
the value of turnover in a state]
(2) The registered person shall be eligible to opt under sub section (1), if—
[(a) save as provided in sub -section (1), he is not eng aged in the
supply of services.]
(a) save as provided in sub -section (1), he is not engaged in the
supply of services.
(b) he is not engaged in making any supply of goods [or
services]3 which are not leviable to tax under this Act;
(c) he is not eng aged in making any inter -State outward
supplies of goods [or services]3;
(d) he is not engaged in making any supply of goods [or
services]3 through an electronic commerce operator who is required
to collect tax at source under section 52; [****]
(e) he is not a manufacturer of such goods as may be notified by
the Government on the recommendations of the [Council ;and]:
[(f) he is neither a casual taxable person nor a non -resident
taxable person.]

of 1961 Provided that where more than one r egistered person are having
the same Permanent Account Number (issued under the Income -tax
Act 1961), the registered person shall not be eligible to opt for the
scheme under sub -section (1) unless all such registered persons opt to
pay tax under that sub -section .

1- Inserted by section 5 (a ) (iii) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2- Substituted by section 5 (b ) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
3- Inserted by section 3 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 25 of 2020.
4- Inserted by section 4 (a) of Uk. Act no 13 of 2019.
5- Omit ted by section 4 (b) (i) of Uk. Act no 13 of 2019.
6- Substituted by section 4 (b) (ii) of Uk. Act no 13 of 2019.
7- inserted by section 4 (b) (iii) of Uk. Act no 13 of 2019.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
[(2A) Notwithstand ing anything to the contrary contained in this
Act, but subject to the provisions of sub -sections (3) (4) of section 9 , a
registered person, not eligible to opt to pay tax under sub -section(1)
and sub -section (2), whose aggregate turnover in the preceding
financial year did not exceed fifty lakh rupees, may opt to pay, in lieu
of the tax payable by him under sub -section (1) of section 9, an
amount of tax calculated at such rate as may be prescribed, but not
exceeding three percent, of the turnover in State, if he is not -
(a) engaged in making any supply of goods or services which are
not leviable to tax under this Act;
(b) engaged in making any inter-state outward supplies of goods or
services ;
(c) engaged in making any supply of goods or services through an
electronic commerce operator who is required to collect tax at
source under section 52;
(d) a manufacturer of such goods or supplier of such services as
may be notified by the government on the recommendations
of the council; and
(e) a casual taxable person or a non -residen t taxable person:
Provided that where more than one registered person are
having the same Permanent Account Number issued under the
income -tax Act, 1961, the registered person shall not be
eligible to opt for the scheme under this sub -section unless all
such registered persons opt to pay tax under this sub -section. ]
(3) The option availed of by a registered person [or sub -section
(2A),as the case may be ] shall lapse with effect from the day on which
his aggregate turnover during a financial year exceeds the limit
specified under sub -section (1) [or sub -section (2A ), as the case may
be].
(4) A taxable person to whom the provisions of sub -section (1)
[or sub -section (2A )] apply shall not collect any tax from the recipient
on supplies made by him nor shall he be entitled to any credit of input
tax.
---------------------
1- inserted by section 4 (c) of Uk. Act no 13 of 2019.
2- inserted by section 4 (d) of Uk. Act no 13 of 2019.
3- inserted by section 4 (e) of Uk. Act no 13 of 2019.

The Uttarakhand Go ods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(5) If the proper officer has reasons to believe that a taxable
person has paid tax under sub-section (1) [or sub -section (2A )]
despite not being eligible , such person shall, in addition to any
tax that may be payable by h im under any other provisions of
this Act, be liable to a penalty and the provisions of section 73 or
and penalty.
[Explanation 1 .- For the purposes of computing aggregate turnover
of a person for determining his eligibility to pay tax under this section,
the expression “aggregate turnover” shall include the value of supplies
made by such person from the 1st day of April of a financial year up to
the date when he becomes liable for regist ration under this Act, but
shall not include the value of exempt supply of services provided by
way of extending deposits, loans or advances in so far as the
consideration is represented by way of interest or discount.

Explanation 2 .- For the purposes o f determining the tax payable by a
person under this section, the expression “turnover in State” shall not
include the value of following supplies, namely: -
(i) supplies from the 1st day of April of a financial year up to the
date when such person becomes liab le for registration under
this Act; and
(ii) exempt supplies of services provided by way of extending
deposits, loans or advances in so far as the consideration is
represented by way of interest or discount.]
11. (1) Where the Government is satisfied tha t it is necessary in the public
interest so to do, it may, on the recommendations of the Council, by
notification, exempt generally , either absolutely or subject to such
conditions as may be specified therein , goods or services or both of
any specified des cription from the whole or any part of the tax leviable
thereon with effect from such date as may be specified in such
notification. Power to
grant
exemption
from tax.

(2) Where the Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public
interest so to do, it may, on the recommendations of the Council, by
special order in each case, under circumstances of an exceptional
nature to be stated in such order , exempt from paym ent of tax any
goods or services or both on which tax is leviable.
-------- ----------------------------------------
4- inserted by section 4 (f) of Uk. Act no 13 of 2019.
1. inserted by section 4 (g) of Uk. Act no 13 of 2019.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(3) The Government may, if it considers necessary or expedient so
to do for the purpose of clarifying the scope or applicability of any
notification issued under sub -section (1) or order issued under sub section (2), insert an explanation in such notification or order, as
the case may be, by notification at any time within one year of
issue of the notification under sub -section (1) or order under sub section (2), and every such explanation shall have effect as if it
had always been the part of the first such notification or order, as
the case may be.
(4) [Any notification issued by the Central Government, on the
recommendations of the Council, under sub -section (1) of section
or order issued under sub -section (2) of the said section of the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be a
notification or, as the case may be, an order issued under this
Act.]
Explanation . ––For the purposes of this section, where an
exemption in respect of any goods or services or both from the
whole or part of the tax leviable thereon has been granted
absolu tely, the registered person supplying such goods or services
or both shall not collect the tax , in excess of the effective rate, on
such supply of goods or services or both.
CHAPTER IV
TIME AND VALUE OF SUPPLY
12.

(1) The liability to pay tax on go ods sha ll arise at the time of
supply , as determined in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Time of supply
of goods.
(2) The time of supply of goods shall be the earlier of the
following dates, namely: -
(a) the date of issue of invoice b y the supplier or the last
date on which he is required, under [***] of section 31, to
issue the invoice with respect to the supply; or
(b) the date on which the supplier receives the payment with
respect to the supply:
------------------------
1. Inserted by section 3 of Uttrakhand Act no 10 of 2017
2. omitted by section 6 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that where the supplier of taxable goods receives
an amount up to one thousand rupees in excess of the amount
indicated in the tax invoice, the time of supply to the extent of
such excess amount shall, at the option of the said supplier, be
the date of issue of invoice in respect of such excess amount .
Explanation 1. ––For the pu rposes of clauses (a) and (b),
“supply” shall be deemed to have been made to the extent it is
covered by the invoice or , as the case may be, the payment.
Explanation 2. ––For the purposes of clause (b), “the date on
which the supplier receives the paym ent” shall be the date on
which the payment is entered in his books of account or the date
on which the payment is credited to his bank account, whichever is
earlier.
(3) In case of supplies in respect of which tax is paid or
liable to be paid on revers e charge basis, the time of supply
shall be the earliest of the following dates, namely: —
(a) the date of the receipt of goods; or
(b) the date of payment as entered in the books of account
of the recipient or the date on which the payment is debite d
in his bank account, whichever is earlier; or
(c) the date immediately following thirty days from the date
of issue of invoice or any other document , by whatever name
called , in lieu thereof by the supplier:
Provided that where it is not possible to determine the time
of supply under clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c), the time of
supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the
recipient of supply.
In case of supply of vouchers by a supplier, the time of
supply shall be -
(a) the date of issue of voucher, if the supply is identifiable at
that point; or
(b) the date of redemption of voucher, in all other cases.
(5) Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply
under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) or sub-section (3) or
sub-section (4), the time of supply shall ––
(a) in a case where a periodical return has to be filed, be the
date on which such return is to be filed ; or
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid.

The Ut tarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6) The time of supply to the extent it relates to an addition
in the value of supply by way of interest, late fee or penalty
for delayed payment of any consideration shall be the date
on which the supplier rece ives such addition in value.
13. (1) The liability to pay tax on services sh all arise at the time of
supply, as determined in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Time of supply
of services.
(2) The time of supply of services shall be the earliest of
the following dates, namely: –
(a) the date of issue of invoice by the supplier, if the invoice is
issued within the period prescribed under [****] (2) of
earlier; or
(b) the date of provi sion of service , if the invoice is not issued
within the period prescribed under [****] section 31 or the
date of receipt of payment, whichever is earlier; or
(c) the date on which the recipient shows the receipt of services in
his books of account, in a case where the provisions of clause
(a) or clause (b) do not apply:
Provided that where the supplier of taxabl e service receives
an amount up to one thousand rupees in excess of the amount
indicated in the tax invoice, the time of supply to the extent of
such excess amount shall, at the option of the said supplier, be the
date of issue of invoice relating to such excess amount .
Explanation . ––For the purposes of clauses (a) and (b) -
(i) the supply shall be
deemed to have been made to the extent it is co vered by
the invoice or, as the case may be, the payment;
(ii) “the date of receipt of
payment” shall be the date on which the payment is
entered in the books of account of the supplier or the
date on which the payment is credited to his bank
account, whiche ver is earlier.
In case of supplies in respect of which tax is paid or liable
to be paid on reverse charge basis, the time of supply shall be
the earlier of the following dates, namely: ––
---------------------------------------------

1- omitted by sec tion 7 (a) (b) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(a) the date of payment as entered in the books of account
of the recipient or the date on which the payment is debited in
his bank account, which ever is earlier ; or
(b) the date immediately following sixty days from the date
of issue of invoice or any other document, by whatever name
called, in lieu thereof by the supplier:
Provided that where it is not possible to determine the time of
supply under clause (a) or clause (b), the time of supply shall be
the date of entry in the books of account of the recipient of supply:
Provided further that in case of supp ly by associated enterprises,
where the supplier of service is located outs ide India, the time of
supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the
recipient of supply or the date of payment, whichever is earlier.
In case of supply of vouchers by a supplier, the time of
supply shall be ––
(a) the date of issue of voucher, if the supply is identifiable
at that point; or
(b) the date of redemption of voucher, in all other cases .
Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply
under the provisions of sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or
sub-section (4), the time of supply shall ––
(a) in a case where a periodical return has to be filed, be the
date on which such return is to be filed; or
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid.
(6) The time of supply to the extent it rela tes to an addition
in the value of supply by way of interest, late fee or penalty
for delayed payment of any consideration shall be the date
on which the supplier receives such addition in value.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2 017

14.

Notwithstanding anything contained in section 12 or section 13, the
time of supply, where there is a change in the rate of tax in respect
of goods or services or both, shall be determined in the following
manner, namely: ––
Change in rate
of tax in
respect of
supply of
goods or
services.
(a) in case the goods or services or both have been supplied
before the change in rate of tax, ––
(i) where the invoice for the same has been issued and the
payment is also received after the change in rate of tax, the time of
supply shall be the date of receipt of payment or the date of issue of
invoice, whichever is earlier; or
(ii) where the invoice has been issued prior to the change in
rate of tax but payment is received after the change in rate of tax, the
time of supply shall be the date of issue of invoice; or
(iii) where the payment has been received before the change
in rate of tax, but the invoice for the same is issued after the change
in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the da te of receipt of
payment;
(b) in case the goods or services or both have been supplied
after the change in rate of tax, ––
(i) where the payment is received after the change in rate of
tax but the invoice has been issued prior to the change in rate of tax,
the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of payment; or
(ii) where the invoice has been issued and payment is received
before the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date
of receipt of payment or date of issue of invoi ce, whichever is
earlier; or
(iii) where the invoice has been issued after the change in rate
of tax but the payment is received before the change in rate of tax,
the time of supply shall be the date of issue of invoice:
Provided that the date of rec eipt of payment shall be the date of
credit in the bank account if such credit in the bank account is after
four working days from the date of change in the rate of tax.
Explanation . ––For the purposes of this section, “the date of
receipt of payment” s hall be the date on which the payment is entered
in the books of account of the supplier or the date on which the
payment is credited to his bank account, whichever is earlier.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
15. (1) The value of a s upply of goods or services or both shall be the
transaction value, which is the price actually paid or payable for the said
supply of goods or services or both where the supplier and the recipient of
the supply are not related and the price is the sole con sideration for the
supply. Value of
taxable
supply.
(2) The value of supply shall include –––
(a) any taxes, duties, cesses, fees and charges levied under any law
for the time being in force other than this Act, the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act a nd the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to
States ) Act, if charged separately by the supplier;
(b) any amount that the supplier is liable to pay in relation to such
supply but which has been incurred by the recipient of the supply and not
included in t he price actually paid or payable for the goods or services or
both;
(c) incidental expenses, including commission and packing, charged
by the supplier to the recipient of a supply and any amount charged for
anything done by the supplier in respect of the supply of goods or services
or both at the time of, or before delivery of goods or supply of services;
(d) interest or late fee or penalty for delayed payment of any
consideration for any supply; and
(e) subsidies directly linked to the price excluding s ubsidies
provided by the Central Government and State Governments.
Explanation . ––For the purposes of this sub -section, the amount of
subsidy shall be included in the value of supply of the supplier who
receives the subsidy.
(3) The value of the sup ply shall not incl ude any discount which is
given —
(a) before or at the time of the supply if such discount has been duly
recorded in the invoice issued in respect of such supply; and
(b) after the supply has been effected, if –
(i) such discount is estab lished in terms of an agreement entered into
at or before the time of such supply and specifically linked to relevant
invoices; and
(ii) input tax credit as is attributable to the discount on the basis of
document issued by the supplier has been reversed by the recipient of the
supply .
(4) Where the value of the supply of goods or services or both
cannot be determined under sub -section ( 1), the same shall be
determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in s ub-section ( 1) or sub section (4), the valu 9e of such supplies as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be
determined in such manner as may be prescribed.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
Explanat ion. - For the purposes of this Act, -
(a) persons shall be deemed to be “ related persons ’’ if -
(i) such persons are officers or directors of one another's
businesses;
(ii) such persons are legally recognised partners in business;
(iii) such persons are employer and e mployee;
(iv) any person directly or indirectly owns, controls or holds
twenty -five per cent . or more of the outstanding voting
stock or shares of both of them;
(v) one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;
(vi) both of them are directly or indirectly controlled by a
third person;
(vii) together they directly or indirectly control a third
person; or
(viii) they are members of the same family;
(b) the term "person" also includes legal persons.
(c) persons who are associated in the business of one another in that
one is the sole agent or sole distributor or sole concessionaire,
howsoever described, of the other, shall be deemed to be related.
CHAPTER V
INPUT TAX CREDIT
16. (1) Every registered person shall, subject to such conditions and
restrictions as may be prescribed and in the manner specified in section
49, be entitled to take credit of input tax charged on any supply of
goods or services or both to him which are used or intended to be used
in the course or furtherance of his business and the said amoun t shall
be credited to the electronic credit ledger of such person . Eligibility
and
conditions
for taking
input tax
credit.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no
registered person shall be entitled to the credit of any input tax in
respect of any supply of goods or services or both to him unless,
–
(a) he is in possession of a tax invoice or debit note issued by a
supplier registered under this Act, or such other tax paying
documents as may be prescribed;
[(aa) The details of the invoice or debt note referred to in clause
(a) has been furnished by the supplier in the statement of outward
supplies and such details have been communicated to the recipient
of such invoice or debit note in the manner specified under section
37]

--------------------------------------------------------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(b) he has received the goods or services or both.
[Explanation – For the purposes of this clause, it shall be deemed
that the registered person has received the goods or, as the case may be,
services -
(i) where the goods are delivered by the supplier to a recipient or
any othe person on the direction of such registered person, whether
acting as an agent or otherwise, before or during movement of goods,
either by way of transfer of documents of title to goods, either by way of
transfer of document of title to goods or otherwise;
(ii) Where the services are provided by the supplier to any person
on the direction of and on acc ount of such registered person.]
(c) subject to the provisions of [Section 41 or section 43 A ] the
tax charged in respect of such supply has been actually paid to the
Government, either in cash or through utilisation of inp ut tax credit
admissible in respect of the said supply; and
(d) he has furnished the return under section 39:

Provided that where the goods against an invoice are received in
lots or instalments, the registered person shall be entitled to take
credit upo n receipt of the last lot or instalment:

Provided further that where a recipient fails to pay to the supplier
of goods or services or both , other than the supplies on which tax is
payable on reverse charge basis, the amount towards the value of
supply alo ng with tax payable thereon within a period of one hundred
and eighty days from the date of issue of invoice by the supplier, an
amount equal to the input tax credit availed by the recipient shall be
added to his output tax liability, along with interest t hereon, in such
manner as may be prescribed:

Provided also that the recipient shall be entitled to avail of the
credit of input tax on payment made by him of the amount towards
the value of supply of goods or services or both along with tax
payable t hereon.

of 1961. (3) Where the registered person has claimed depreciation on the
tax component of the cost of capital goods and plant and
machinery under the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961, the
input tax credit on the said tax component shall not be allowed.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
1- subs by section 8 (a) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2- subs by section 8 (b) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
[(4) A registered person shall not be entitled to take input tax credit in
respect of any invoice or debit note for supply of goods or services or
both after the due date of furnishing of the return under section 39 for the
month of September following the end of financial year to which such
invoice or debit note pertains or furnishing of the relevant annual return,
whichever is earlier ]
17. (1) Where the goods or services or both are used by the registered person
partly for the purpose of a ny business and partly for other purposes, the amount
of credit shall be restricted to so much of the input tax as is attributable to the
purposes of his business Apportion ment of
credit and
blocked
credits.
(2) Where the goods or services or both are us ed by the registered
person partly for effecting taxable supplies including zero -rated supplies
under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act and
partly for effecting exempt supplies under the said Acts, the amount of
credit shall be re stricted to so much of the input tax as is attributable to
the said taxable supplies including zero -rated supplies.
(3) The value of exempt supply under sub -section (2) shall be such as
may be prescribed, and shall include supplies on which the recipien t is
liable to pay tax on reverse charge basis , transactions in securities, sale of
land and , subject to clause (b) of paragraph 5 of Schedule II, sale of
building .
[Explanation - For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “value of
exempt supply ” shall not include the value of activities or transactions specified
in Schedule III, except III, except those specified in pa ragraph 5 of the said
Schedule.]
(4) A banking company or a financial institution including a non banking financial company, e ngaged in supplying services by way of
accepting deposits, extending loans or advances shall have the option to
either comply with the provisions of sub -section (2), or avail of, every
month, an amount equal to fifty per cent. of the eligible input tax cre dit
on inputs, capital goods a nd input services in that month and the rest
shall lapse:
Provided that the option once exercised shall not be withdrawn during the
remain ing part of the financial year:
Provided further that the restriction of fifty per cent. shall not apply to the
tax paid on supplies made by one registered person to another regis tered person
having the same Permanent Account Number .

---------------------------------------------
1- inserted by section 9 (a) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2- Substituted by section 4 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 25 of 2020 .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) of
be available in respect of the following, namely: -
(a) motor vehicles and other conveyances except when they are
used––
[(a) motor vehicles for transportation of persons having
approved seating capacity of not more than thirteen persons
(includin g the driver), except when they are used for making
the following taxable supplies namely: -

(A) further
supply of such motor vehicles; or
(B)
transportation of passengers; or
(C) Imparting
training on driving such motor vehicles:

(aa) Vessels and aircraft except when they are used -
(i) for making the following taxable supplies, namely: -
(A) further supply of such vessels and aircraft; or
(B) transportation of passengers; or
(C) imparting training on nayigating such vessels; or
(D) imparting training on flying suc h aircraft;
(ii) for transportation of goods;
(ab) services of general insurance, servicing, repair and
maintenance in so far as they relate to motor vehicles, vessels
or aircraft referred to in clase (a) or clause (aa):

Provided that the input tax cre dit in credit in respect of such
services shall be available -
(j) where the motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft referred to in clause
(a) or clause (aa) are used for the purpose specified therein;

(ii) where received by a taxable person engaged -
(I) In the manufa cture of such motor vehicles, vessels or
aircraft; or
(II) In the supply of general insurance services in respect of
supply of general insurance serv ices in respect of such
motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft insured by him;

(b) the following supply of goods or services or both -

-------------------------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(i) food and beverages, outdoor catering, treatment, health services
cosmetic and plastic surgery, leasing, renting or hiring of motor vehicl es,
vessels or aircraft referred to in clause (a) or clause (aa) except when used
for the purposes specified therein, life insurance and health insurance :
Provided that the input tax credit in respect of such goods or services,
or both shall be availab le where an inward supply of such goods or
services or both is used by registered person for making an outward taxable
supply of the same category of goods or services or both or as an element
of a taxable composite or mixed supply;

(ii) membership of a club, health and fitness centre ; and
(iii) travel benefits extended to employees on vacation such
as leave or home travel concession:
Provided that the input tax credit in respect of such goods or services
or both shall be available, where it is obligato ry for an employer to provide
the same to its employees under any l aw for the time being in force.]

(c) works contract services when supplied for con struction of an
immovable property (other than plant and machinery) except where it is an
input service for further supply of works contract service;

(d) goods or services or both received by a taxable person for
construction of an immovable property (other than plant or machinery) on
his own account including when such goods or services or both are use d in
the course or furtherance of business .

Explanation . ––For the purposes of clause s (c) and (d), the expression
“construction” includes re -construction, renovation, additions or alterations
or repairs, to the extent of capitali sation , to the said im movable property;

(e) goods or services or both on which tax h as been paid under

(f) goods or services or both received by a non -resident taxable
person except on goods imported by him;

(g) goods or services or both used for perso nal consumption;

------------------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 9 (b) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(h) goods lost, stolen, destroyed, written off or disposed of by way of
gift or free samples; and

(i) any tax paid in accordance with the provisions of sections 74, 129
and 130.

The Government may prescribe the manner in which the credit
referred to in sub -sections (1) and (2) may be attributed.

Explanation. –– For the purposes of this Chapter and Chapter VI , the
expression “plant and machinery” means apparatus, equipment, and
machinery fixed to earth by foundation or structural support that are
used for making outward supply of goods or services or both and
includes such foundation and structural supports but excludes -

(i) land, building or any o ther civil structures ;
(ii) telecommunication towers; and
(iii) pipelines laid outside the factory premises.

18. (1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed –

(a) a person who has applied for registration under this Act within
thirty days from the date on which he becomes liable to registration and
has been granted such registration shall be entitled to take credit of input
tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi finished or finished goods held in stock on the day immediately
preceding the date from which he becomes liable to pay tax under the
provisions of this Act;

(b) a person who takes registration under sub -section ( 3) of
inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished
goods held in stock on the day immediately preceding the date of grant
of registration;

(c) where any registered person ceases to pay tax under section 10,
he shall be entitled to take credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in
stock, inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock
and on capital goods on the day immediately pre ceding the date from
which he becomes liable to pay tax under section 9:

Provided that the credit on capital goods shall be reduced by such
percent age points as may be prescribed;

Availabilit y of credit
in special
circumstan ces.

The Uttarakhand Goods A nd Services Tax Act, 2017

(d) where an exempt supply of goods or services or both by a
registered person becomes a taxable supply, such person shall be
entitled to take credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock and
inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock
relatable to such exempt supply and on capital goods exclusively used
for such exempt supply on the day immediately preceding the date from
which such supply becomes taxable:

Provided that the credit on capital good s shall be reduced by such
percent age points as may be prescribed.

(2) A registered person shall not be entitled to take input tax
credit under sub -section (1) in respect of any supply of goods or
services or both to him after the expiry of one year from the date
of issue of tax invoice relating to such supply.
(3) Where there is a change in the constitution of a registered
person on account of sale, merger, demerger, amalgamation, lease
or transfer of the business with the specific provisions for trans fer
of liabilities, the said registered person shall be allowed to transfer
the input tax credit which remains un utilised in his electronic
credit ledger to such sold, merged, demerged, amalgamated,
leased or transferred business in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(4) Where any registered person who has availed of input tax
credit opts to pay tax under section 10 or, where the goods or
services or both supplied by him become wholly exempt, he shall
pay an amount, by way of debit in the electronic cre dit ledger or
electronic cash ledger, equivalent to the credit of input tax in
respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi finished or finished goods held in stock and on capital goods,
reduced by such percent age points as may be prescribe d, on the
day immediately preceding the date of exercising of such option
or, as the case may be, the date of such exemption:

Provided that after payment of such amount, the balance of input tax
credit, if any, lying in his elect ronic credit ledger sha ll lapse .

(5) The amount of credit under sub -section (1) and the amount
payable under sub -section ( 4) shall be calculated in such manner
as may be prescribed.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6) In case of supply of capital goo ds or plant and machinery,
on which input tax credit has been taken, the registered person
shall pay an amount equal to the input tax credit taken on the said
capital goods or plant and machinery reduced by such percent age
points as may be prescribed or th e tax on the transaction value of
such capital goods or plant and machinery determined under
Provided that where refractory bricks, moulds and dies, jigs and
fixtures are supplied as scrap, the taxable person may pay tax on the
transaction value of such goods determined under section 15.
19. (1) The principal shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed, be allowed input tax credit on inputs sent to a job
worker for job work.

(2) Notwithstan ding anything contained in clause ( b) of sub section ( 2) of section 16, the principal shall be entitled to take
credit of input tax on inputs even if the inputs are directly sent to
a job worker for job work without being first brought to his place
of busi ness.
Taking
input tax
credit in
respect of
inputs and
capital
goods sent
for job
work.
(3) Where the inputs sent for job work are not received back by
the principal after completion of job work or otherwise or are not
supplied from the place of busines s of the job worker in
accordance with clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of
that such inputs had been supplied by the principal to the job
worker on the day when the said inputs we re sent out:

Provided that where the inputs are sent directly to a job worker, the
period of one year shall be counted from the date of receipt of inputs by
the job worker.

(4) The principal shall, subject to such conditions and
restrictions as m ay be prescribed, be allowed input tax credit on
capital goods sent to a job worker for job work.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( b) of sub section ( 2) of section 16, the principal shall be entitled to take
credit of input tax on capital goods even if the capital goods are
directly sent to a job worker for job work without being first
brought to his place of business.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6) Where the capital goods sent for job work are not received
back by the principal within a period of three years of being sent
out, it shall be deemed that such capital goods had been supplied
by the principal to the job worker on the day when the said
capital goods were sent out:

Provided that where the capital goods are sent directly to a job
worker, the period of three years shall be counted from the date of
receipt of capital goods by the job worker .

(7) Nothing c ontained in sub -section (3) or sub -section (6 ) shall
apply to moulds and dies, jigs and fixtur es, or tools sent out to a
job worker for job work.

Explanation . - For the purpose of this section, “principal”
means the person referred to in section 143.

20.(1) The Input Service Distributor shall distribute the credit of State
tax as State tax or integrated tax and integrated tax as integrated tax or
State tax, by way of issue of document containing the amount of input
tax credit being distributed in such manner as may be prescribed.
Manner of
distribution
of credit by
Input
Service
Distribu tor.
The Input Service Distributor may distribute the credit subject
to the following conditions, namely: ––

(a) the credit can be distributed to the recipients of credit against a
document containing such details as may be prescribed;

(b) the amount of the credit distributed shall not exceed the
amount of credit available for distribution;

(c) the credit of tax paid on input services attributable to a
recipient of credit shall be distributed only to that recipient;

(d) the credit of tax paid on inp ut services attributable to more
than one recipient of credit shall be distributed amongst such
recipients to whom the input service is attributable and such
distribution shall be pro rata on the basis of the turnover in a State
or turnover in a Union terr itory of such recipient, during the relevant
period, to the aggregate of the turnover of all such recipients to
whom such input service is attributable and which are operational in
the current year, during the said relevant period ;

The Uttarakhand Good s And Services Tax Act, 2017

(e) the credit of tax paid on input services attributable to all
recipients of credit shall be distributed amongst such recipients and
such distribution shall be pro rata on the basis of the turnover in a
State or turnover in a Union territory of such recipient, during the
relevant period, to the aggregate of the turnover of all recipients and
which are operational in the current year, during the said relevant
period.
Explanation . ––For the purposes of this section, ––
(a) the “relevant period” shall be ––
(i) if the recipients of credit have turnover in their States or Union
territories in the financial year preceding the year during which credit is
to be distributed, the said financial year; or
(ii) if some or all recipients of the credit do not have any turnover
in their States or Union territories in the financial year preceding the
year during which the credit is to be distributed, the last quarter for
which details of such turnover of all the recipients are available,
previous to the month during which credit is to be distributed;
(b) the expression “recipient of credit” means the supplier of
goods or services or both having the same Permanent Account Number
as that of the Input S ervice Distributor;
(c) the term “turnover” , in relation to any registered person
engaged in the supply of taxable goods as well as goods not taxable
under this Act, means the value of turnover, reduced by the amount of
any duty or tax levied under [entries 84 and 92 A ] of List I of the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and entry 51 and 54 of List II of
the said S chedule.
21. Where the Input Service Distributor distributes the credit in
contravention of the provisions contained in section 20 resul ting in
excess distribution of credit to one or more recipients of credit, the
excess credit so distributed shall be recovered from such recipients
along with interest, and the provisions of section 73 or section 74, as the
case may be, shall , mutatis muta ndis, apply for determination of amount
to be recovered . Manner of
recovery of
credit
distributed
in excess.
CHAPTER - VI
REGISTRATION
22. [(1) Every supplier making a taxable supply of goods or services or
both in the state shall be liable to be reg istered under this Act if his
aggregate turnover in a financia; year exceeds twenty lakh rupees:
Persons
liable for
registration
.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 10 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that where such person makes taxable supplies of goods or
services or both from any of the special category States, he shall be liable to be
registered if his aggregate turnover in a financial year exceeds ten lakh rupees;
Provided further that where such person makes taxable supplies of
goods or services or both from a special category state in respect of which
the Central Government has enhanced the aggregate turnover referred to
in the first proviso, he shall be liable to be registered if his aggregate
turnover in a financial year exceeds the amount equivalent to such
enhanced tur nover: ]1
[Provided also that the Government may, on the recommendations of the
council, enhance t he aggregate turnover from twenty lakh rupees to such amount
not exceeding forty lakh rupees in case of supplier who is engaged exclusively in
the supply of goods, subject to such conditions and limitations, as may be
notifi ed.
Explanation - For the purpose s of the sub -section, a person shall be considered to
be engaged exclusively in the supply of goods even if he is engaged in exempt
supply of services provided by way of extending deposits, loans or advances in
so far as the consideration is represented by way of interest or discount]2
(2) Every person who, on the day immediately preceding the appointed
day, is registered or holds a license under an existing law, shall be liable
to be registered under this Act with effect from the appointed day.
(3) Where a business carried on by a taxable person registered under
this Act is transferred, whether on account of succession or otherwise, to
another person as a going concern, the transferee or the successor, as the
case may be, shall be liable to be register ed with effect from the date of
such transfer or succession.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section s (1) and ( 3), in a
case of transfer pursuant to sanction of a scheme or an arrangement for
amalgamation or, as the case may be, de -merger of two or more
companies pursuant to an order of a High Court, Tribunal or otherwise,
the transferee shall be liable to be registered, with effect from the date on
which the Registrar of Companies issues a certificate of incorporation
giving effect to such order of the High Court or Tribunal .
Explanation . ––For the purposes of this section, ––
(i) the expression “aggregate turnover” shall include all supplies made by the
taxable person, whether on his own account or made on behalf of all his
principa ls;
-----------------
1- Substituted by section 11 (a) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2- inser ted by section 5 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 13 of 2019 .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(ii) the supply of goods, after completion of job work, by a registered
job worker shall be treated as the su pply of goods by the principal
referred to in section 143, and the value of such goods shall not be
included in the aggregate turnover of the registered job worker ;
1(iii) In the Expression “Special Category States” means the S tate as
specified in sub -clause (g) of clause (4) of Article 279 A of the
Constitution of except as the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Meghalaya, Sikkim and
Uttrakhand.]
23. (1) The following persons shall not be liable to registration,
namely: –– Persons no t
liable for
registration .
(a) any person engaged exclusively in the business of supplying goods
or services or both that are not liable to tax or wholly e xempt from tax
under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act ;
(b) an agriculturist, to the extent of supply of produce out of cultivation
of land.
The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
by notification, spec ify the category of persons who may be
exempted from obtaining registration under this Act.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 22,
the following categories of persons shall be required to be registered
under this Act, - Compulsory
registration
in certain
cases .
(i) persons making any inter -State taxable supply;
(ii) casual taxable persons making taxable supply;
(iii) persons who are required to pay tax under reverse charge;
(iv) person who are required to pay tax under s ub-section (5) of section
9;
(vii) persons who make taxable supply of goods or services or both on
behalf of other taxable persons whether as an agent or otherwise;
(viii) Input Service Distributor, whether or not separately registered
under this Act;

-----------------------------
1-Substituted by section 11 (b) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018
2- Inserted by section 12 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(ix) persons who supply goods or services or both, other than supplies
specified under sub -section (5) of section 9, through such electronic
commerce operator who is required to collect tax at source under
(x) every electronic commerce operator; [who is required to collect
tax at source under Section 52]
(xi) every person supplying online information and data base access or
retrieval services from a place outside India to a person in India, other
than a registered person; and
(xii) such other person or class of persons as ma y be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council.
(1) Every person who is liable to be registered under section 22 or
on which he becomes liable to registra tion, in such manner and subject
to such conditions as may be prescribed: Procedure
for
registration.
Provided that a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable
person shall apply for registration at least five days prior to the
commencement of busi ness:

[Provided further that a person having a unit, as defined in the
special Economic Zone Act, 2005, in a special Economic Zone or
being a Special Economic Zone developer shall have to apply for a
sparate registration, as distinct from his place of bu siness located
outside the spec ial Economic Zone in the State.]

Explanation. - Every person who makes a supply from the
territorial waters of India shall ob tain registration in the State where
the nearest point of the appropriate baseline is located in the State .
(2) A person seeking registration under this Act shall be
granted a single registration:
[Provided that a person having multiple places of business in the
state may be granted a s eparate registration for each such place of
business, subj ect to such conditions as may be prescribed. ]
(3) A person, though not liable to be registered under section 22 or
this Act, as are applicable to a registered person, shall apply t o such
person.

----------------------------------------------------------
1- Inserted by section 13 (a) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2- Substituted by section 13 (b) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(4) A person who has obtained or is required to obtain more
than one registration, whether in one State or Union territory or
more than one State or Union territory shall, in respect of each
such registration, be treated as distinct persons for the purposes
of this Act .

of 1961. (5) Where a person who has obtained, or is required to obtain
registration in a State or Union territory in respect of a n
establishment, has an establishment in another State or Union
territory , then such establishmen ts shall be treated as
establishments of distinct persons for the purposes of this Act.
(6) Every person shall have a Permanent Account Number
issued under the Income -tax Act, 1961 in order to be eligible for
grant of regist ration:

Provided that a per son required to deduct tax under section 51 may
have, in lieu of a Permanent Account Number, a Tax Deduction and
Collection Account Number issued under the said Act in order to be
eligible for grant of registration.

[(6A) Every registered person shall undergo authentication, or
furnish proof o f possession of Aadhaar number, in such form and
manner and within such time as may be prescribed:

Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to the
registered person, such person shall be offered alternat e and viable
means of identification in such manner as Government may, on the
recommendation of the Council, prescribe:

Provided further that in case of failure to undergo authentication or
furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number or furnish alternat e and
viable means of identification, registration allotted to such person shall
deemed to be inva lid and the other provisions of this Act shall apply as
if such person does not have a registration.

(6B) On and from the date of notification, every indivi dual shall,
in order to be eligible for grant of registration, undergo authentication,
or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number, in such manner as
the government may, on the recommendations of the council, specify in
the said notification.
Provide d that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to an
individual, such individual shall be offered alternate and viable means
of identification in such manner as the Government may, on the
recommendations of the Council, specify in the said notifiacation.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6C) On and from the date of notification, every person, other than
an individual, shall, in order to be eligible for grant of registration,
undergo authentication, or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar
number of the karta, Managing Director, whole time Director, such
number of partners, Members of Managing Committee of Association,
Board of Trustees, authorized representative, authorized signatory and
such other class of persons, as the Government may, o n the
recommendations of the Council, Specify in the said notification:

Provided that where such person or class of persons have not been
assigned the Aadhaar Number, such person or class of persons shall be
offered alternate and viable means of identific ation in such manner as
the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, specify
in the said notification.

(6D) The provisions of sub -section (6A) or sub -section (6B) or
sub-section (6C) shall not apply to such person or class of persons or
part of the State, as the Government may, on the recommendation s of
the Council, Specify by notification.
Explanation - For the purposes of the section, the expression
“Aadhaar number” shall have the same meaning as assigned it in clause
(a) of section 2 of the Aadhaar (Tar geted Delivery of Financial and
Other Subsidies, Ben efits and Services) Act, 2016.]1

(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6), a
non-resident taxable person may be granted registration under
sub-section ( 1) on the basis of such other documents as may be
prescribed.
(8) Where a person who is liable to be registered under this Act
fails to obtain registration, the proper officer may, without
prejudice to any action which may be taken under this Act or
under any other law for the time being in force, proceed to
register such person in such manner as may be prescribed.
(9) notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1 ), ––

of 1947. (a) any speciali sed agency of the United Nations Organi sation or
any Multilat eral Financial Institution and Organi sation notified
under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947,
Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries ; and
---------------- ---------------------------- ----
1- Inserted by section 6 of Uk.Act no 13 of 2019 .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(b) any other person or class of persons, as may be notified by
the Commissioner,
shall be granted a Unique Identity Number in such manner and for
such purposes, including refund of taxes on the notified supplies of
goods or services or both received by them, as may be prescribed.
(10) The registratio n or the Unique Identity Number shall be
granted or rejected after due verification in such manner and
within such period as may be prescribe d.
(11) A certificate of registration shall be issued in such form
and with effect from such date as may be prescribed.
(12) A registration or a Unique Identity Number shall be
deemed to have been granted after the expiry of the period
prescribed u nder sub -section ( 10), if no deficiency has been
communicated to the applicant within that period.
26(1) The grant of registration or the Unique Identity Number under
the Central Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be a grant
of registration or the Unique Identity Number under this Act subject to
the condition that the application for registration or the Unique Identity
Number has not been rejected under this Act within the time specified
in sub -section (10 ) of section 25. Deemed
registration .
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 10) of
Unique Identity Number under the Central Goods and Services
Tax Act shall be deemed to be a rejection of application for
registration under this Act.

27.(1) The certificate of registration issued to a casual taxable
person or a non -resident taxable person shall be valid for the period
specified in the application for registration or ninety days from the
effective date of r egistration, whichever is earlier and such person
shall make taxable supplies only after the issuance of the certificate of
registration:
Provided that the proper officer may, on sufficient cause being
shown by the said taxable person, extend the said period of ninety
days by a further period not exceeding ninety days. Special
provisions
relating to
casual
taxable
person and
non-resident
taxable
person.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) A casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person
shall, at the time of submission of application for registration under
sub-section ( 1) of section 25, make an advance deposit of tax in an
amount equivalent to the estimated tax liability of such person for
the period for which the registra tion is sought:
Provided that where any extension of time is sought under
sub-section ( 1), such taxable person shall deposit an additional
amount of tax equivalent to the estimated tax liability of such person
for the period for which the extension is sou ght.
(3) The amount deposited under sub -section ( 2) shall be credited
to the electronic cash ledger of such person and shall be utilised
in the manner provided under section 49.
28. (1) Every registered person and a person to whom a Unique
Identity Numb er has been assigned shall inform the proper officer
of any changes in the information furnished at the time of
registration or subsequent thereto, in such form and manner and
within such period as may be prescribed .
(2) The proper officer may, on the b asis of information
furnished under sub -section (1) or as ascertained by him, approve
or reject amendments in the registration particulars in such
manner and within such period as may be prescribed:

Provided that approval of the proper officer shall not be
required in respect of amendment of such particulars as may be
prescribed:

Provided further that the proper officer shall not reject the
application for amendment in the registration particulars without
giving the person an opportunity of being heard.

(3) Any rejection or approval of amendments under the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be a
rejection or approval under this Act.
Amendment
of
registration.
29. (1) The proper officer may, either on his own motion or on an
applica tion filed by the registered person or by his legal heirs, in
case of death of such person, cancel the registration, in such
manner and within such period as may be prescribed, having
regard to the circumstances where, –– Cancellation
[or
Suspension]
of
registration.

-----------------------------------------------------------------
1- Inserted in marginal heading by section 14 (a) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(a) the business has been discontinu ed, transferred fully for any
reason including death of the proprietor, amalgamated with other legal
entity, demerged or otherwise disposed of; or
(b) there is any change in the constitution of the business; or
4(c) the taxable person is no longer liab le to be registered under
voluntarily made under sub -section (3) of section 25.]
[Provided that during pendency of the registered person, the
registration may be suspended for such period a nd in su ch manner
as may be prescribed.]
The proper officer may cancel the registration of a person from
such date, including any retrospective date, as he may deem fit,
where, ––
(a) a registered person has contravened such provisions of the Act
or the rules made thereunder as may be prescribed ; or
(b) a person paying tax under section 10 has not furnished returns
for three consecutive tax periods; or
(c) any registered person, other than a person specified in clause
(b), has not furnished re turns for a continuous period of six months; or
(d) any person who has taken voluntary registration under sub section ( 3) of section 25 has not commenced business within six
months from the date of reg istration; or
(e) registration has been obtained by means of fraud, wilful
misst atement or suppression of facts :
Provided that t he proper officer shall not cancel the registration
without giving the person a n opportunity of being heard.
[Provided further that during pendency of the proceedings relati ng to
cancellation of registration, the proper officer may suspend the
registration for such period and in such manner as may be prescribed.]
(3) The cancellation of registration under this section shall not
affect the liability of the person to pay tax and other dues under
this Act or to discharge any obligation under this Act or the rules
made thereunder for any period prior to the date of cancellation
whether or not such tax and other dues are determined before or
after the date of cancellation.
------------------------------------------------------
1- Inserted by section 14 (b) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2- Inserted by section 14 (c) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
3- Substituted by section 5 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(4) The cancellation of registration under the Central Goods
and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be a cancellation of
registration under this Act .
(5) Every registered person whose registration is can celled
shall pay an amount, by way of debit in the electronic credit
ledger or electronic cash ledger, equivalent to the credit of
input tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs
contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock or
capital goods or plant and machinery on the day immediately
preceding the date of such cancellation or the output tax
payable on such goods, whichever is higher, calculated in
such manner as may be prescribed:

Provided that in case of capital goods or plant and machinery,
the taxable person shall pay an amount equal to the input tax credit
taken on the said capital goods or plant and machinery, reduced by
such percent age points as may be prescribed or the tax on the
transaction value of such capital go ods or plant and machinery
under section 15, whichever is higher .

(6) The amount payable under sub -section ( 5) shall be
calculated in such manner as may be prescribed.
30. (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any registered
person , whose registration is cancelled by the proper officer on his
own motion, may apply to such officer for revocation of
cancellation of the registration in the prescribed manner within
thirty days from the date of se rvice of the cancellation order:
[Provided that such period may, on sufficient cause being
shown, and for reasons to be recorded in writing, be extended, ––
(a) by the Additional Commissioner or the Joint Commissioner,
as the case may be, for a period not exceeding thirty days;
(b) by the Co mmissioner, for a further period not exceeding
thirty days, beyond the period specified in clause ( a).] Revocation of
cancellation of
registration.
(2) The proper officer may, in such manner and within such
period as may be prescribed, by order, either r evoke
cancellation of the registra tion or reject the application:
Provided that the application for revocation of cancellation of
registration shall not be rejected unless the applicant has been given
an opportunity of being heard.
------------------- -------------------
1. Inserted by section 6 of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

The revocation of cancellation of registration under the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be a
revocation of cancel lation of registration under this Act .

CHAPTER - VII
TAX INVOICE, CREDIT AND DEBIT NOTES

31. (1) A registered person supplying taxable goods shall,
before or at the time of, ––
(a) removal of goods for supply to the recipient, where the
supply invol ves movement of goods; or
(b) delivery of goods or making available thereof to the
recipient, in any other case, Tax invoice.
issue a tax invoice showing the description, quantity and value of
goods, the tax charged thereon and such other particulars as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of
the Council, by notification, specify the categories of goods or
supplies in respect of which a tax invoice shall be issued , within
such time and in such manner as may be pre scribed.
(2) A registered person supplying taxable services shall,
before or after the provision of service but within a prescribed
period , issue a tax invoice, showing the description, value, tax
charged thereon and such other particulars as may be
prescribed:
[Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of
the Council, by notification, ––
(a) specify the categories of services or supplies in respect of which
a tax invoice shall be issued, within such time and in such manner
as may be pr escribed;
(b) subject to the conditions mentioned therein, specify the
categories of services in respect of which ––
(i) any other document issued in relation to the supply shall be
deemed to be a tax invoice; or
(ii) tax invoice may not be issued.]
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections (1)
and ( 2) ––
---------------- -----------
1-Substituted by section 7 of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(a) a registered person may, within one month from th e date of
issuance of certificate of registration and in such manner as may be
prescribed, issue a revised invoice against the invoice already issued
during the period beginning with the effective date of registration till the
date of issuance of certifica te of registration to him;
(b) a registered person may not issue a tax invoice if the value of the
goods or services or both supplied is less than two hundred rupees
subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be prescribed ;
(c) a registered per son supplying exempted goods or services or both
or paying tax under the provisions of section 10 shall issue, instead of a
tax invoice, a bill of supply containing such particulars and in such
manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the registered per son may not issue a bill of supply if
the value of the goods or services or both supplied is less than two
hundred rupees subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be
prescribed ;
(d) a registered person shall, on receipt of advance payment with
respect to any supply of goods or services or both, issue a receipt
voucher or any other document, containing such particulars as may be
prescribed, evidencing receipt of such payment;
(e) w here, on receipt of advance payment with respect to any supply
of goods or services or both the registered person issues a receipt
voucher, but subsequently no supply is made and no tax invoice is issued
in pursuance thereof, the said registered person may issue to the person
who had made the payment, a refu nd voucher against such payment;
(f) a registered person who is liable to pay tax under sub -section ( 3)
or sub-section ( 4) of section 9 shall issue an invoice in respect of goods
or services or both received by him from the supplier who is not
registered on the date of receipt of goods or services or both;
(g) a registered person who is liable to pay tax under sub -section
(3) or sub -section (4) of section 9 shall issue a payment voucher at the
time of making payment to the supplier.
(4) In case of continuous supply o f goods, where successive
statements of accounts or successive payments are involved, the
invoice shall be issued before or at the time each such statement is
issued or, as the case may be, each such payment is received.
(5) Subject to the provision s of clause (d) of sub -section (3), i n case
of continuous supply of services, ––
(a) where the due date of payment is ascertainable from the contract,
the invoice shall be issued on or before the due date of payment;
(b) where the due date of payment is not ascertainable from the
contract, the invoice shall be issued before or at the time when the
supplier of service receives the payment;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(c) where the payment is linked to the completion of an
event, the i nvoice shall be issued on or before the date of
completion of that event.
(6) In a case where the supply of services ceases under a
contract before the completion of the supply, the invoice shall
be issued at the time when the supply ceases and such in voice
shall be issued to the extent of the supply made before such
cessation.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),
where the goods being sent or taken on approval for sale or
return are removed before the supply take s place, the in voice
shall be issued before or at the time of supply or six months
from the date of removal, whichever is earlier.

[31A. Explanation . ––For the purposes of this section, the expression
“tax invoice” shall include any revised invoice issued by the
supplier in respect of a supply made earlier.

The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
prescribe a class of registered persons who shall provide prescribed
modes of electronic payment to the recipient of supply of goods or
services or bot h made by him and give option to such recipient to
make payment accordingly, in such manner and subject to such
conditions and restrictions , as may be prescribed]

Facility of
digital payment
to recipient
32. (1) A person who is not a registered person shall not collect in
respect of any supply of goods or services or both any amoun t
by way of tax under this Act.

(2) No registered person shall collect tax except in accordance
with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder . Prohibition of
unauthorised
collection of tax
33. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law
for the time being in force, where any supply is made for a
consideration, every person who is liable to pay tax for such supply
shall prominently indicat e in all documents relating to assessment,
tax invoice and other like documents, the amount of tax which shall
form part of the price at which such supply is made. Amount of tax
to be indicated
in tax invoice
and other
documents.
-------------
1- inser ted by section 7 of Uk.Act no 13 of 2019 .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

34. (1) [where one or more tax invoices have been issued ] for supply of
any goods or services or both and the taxable value or tax charged
in that tax invoice is found to exceed the taxable value or tax
payable in respect of such supply, or where the goods supplied are
returned by the recipient, or where goods or services or both
supplied are found to be deficient, the registered person, who has
supplied such g oods or services or both, may issue to the recipient
[one or more credit notes for supplier made in a financial year ]
containing such particulars as may be prescribed. Credit and
debit notes.
(2) Any registered person who issues a credit note in relati on to
a supply of goods or services or both shall declare the details of
such credit note in the return for the month during which such
credit note has been issued but not later than September
following the end of the financial year in which such supply
was made, or the date of furnishing of the relevant annual
return, whichever is earlier, and the tax liability shall be
adjusted in such manner as may be prescribed :

Provided that no reduction in output tax liability of the supplier
shall be permit ted, if the incidence of tax and interest on such supply
has been passed on to any other person.

(3) [where one or more tax invoices have been issued” shall
be substituted ] for supply of any goods or services or both and
the taxable value or tax charg ed in that tax invoice is found to be
less than the taxable value or tax payable in respect of such
supply, the registered person, who has supplied such goods or
services or bot h, shall issue to the recipient [one or more debit
note for supplies made in a financial year ] containing such
particulars as may be prescribed.

(4) Any registered person who issues a debit note in relation to
a supply of goods or services or both shall declare the details of
such debit note in the return for the month during wh ich such
debit note has been issued and the tax liability shall be adjusted
in such manner as may be prescribed.

Explanation . ––For the purposes of this Act, the expression “debit
note” shall include a supplementary invoice.

---------------------- -----------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 15 (a) (i) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2- Substituted by section 15 (a) (ii) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
3- Substituted by section 15 (b) (i) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
4- Substituted by section 15 (b) (ii) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

CHAPTER VIII
ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS
35. (1) Every registered person shall keep and maintain, at his principal
place of business, as mentioned in the certificate of registration, a true
and correct account of -
(a) production or manufacture of goods;
(b) inward and outward supply of goods or services or both;
(c) stock of goods;
(d) input tax credit availed;
(e) output tax payable and paid; and
(f) such other particulars as may be prescribed : Accounts
and other
records.

Provided that where more than one place of business is specified in the
certificate of registration, the accounts relating to each place of business
shall be k ept at such places of business:
Provided further that the registered person may keep and maintain such
accounts and other particulars in electronic form in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) Every owner or operator of warehouse or godown or any ot her
place used for storage of goods and every transporter, irrespective of
whether he is a registered person or not, shall maintain records of the
consigner, consignee and other relevant details of the goods in such
manner as may be prescribed.

(3) The Commissioner may notify a class of taxable persons to
maintain additional accounts or documents for such purpose as may
be specified therein.

(4) Where the Commissioner considers that any class of taxable
persons is not in a position to keep and maintain accounts in
accordance with the provisions of this section, he may, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, permit such class of taxable persons to
maintain accounts in such manner as may be prescribed.

(5) [***]

----------------------- -------------------------------------
1. Omitted by section 4 of UK Act no 22 of 2021.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6) Subject to the provisions of clause ( h) of sub -section ( 5) of
goods or services or both in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1), the proper officer shall determine the amount of tax
payable on the goods or services or both that are not accounted for,
as if such goods or services or bot h had been supplied by such
person and the provisions of section 73 or section 74, as the case
may be, shall , mutatis mutandis , apply for determination of such
tax.
36. (1) Every registered person required to keep and maintain books of
account or oth er records in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1 ) of section 35 shall retain them until the expiry of seventy two months from the due date of furnishing of annual return for the
year pertaining to such accounts and records: Period of
retention
of
accounts.
Provided that a registered person, who is a party to an appeal or
revision or any other proceedings before any Appellate Authority or
Provisional Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court, whether filed by
him or by the Commissioner , or is under investigation for an offence
under Chapter XIX, shall retain the books of account and other records
pertaining to the subject matter of such appeal or revision or proceedings
or investigation for a period of one year after final disposal of su ch
appeal or revision or proceedings or investigation , or for the period
specified above, whichever is later.
CHAPTER - IX
RETURNS
37. (1) Every registered person, other than an Input Service D istributor, a
non-resident taxable person and a person pay ing tax under the
provisions of section 10 or section 51 or section 52, shall furnish,
electronically, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, the
details of outward supplies of goods or services or both effected
during a tax period on or before the tenth day of the month
succeeding the said tax period and such details shall be
communicated to the recipient of the said supplies within such time
and in such manner as may be prescribed: Furnishing
details of
outward
supplies.
------------------------- --------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to furnish the
details of outward supplies during the period from the eleventh day to the
fifteenth day of the m onth succeedi ng the tax period:
Provided further that the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, by notification , extend the time limit for furnishing such details for
such class of taxable persons as may be specified therein :
Provided also th at any extension of time limit notified by the
Commissioner of central tax shall be deemed to be notified by the
Commissioner.
(2) Every registered person who has been communicated the details
under sub -section ( 3) of section 38 or the details pertainin g to inward
supplies of Input Service Distributor under sub -section ( 4) of section
38, shall either accept or reject the details so communicated, on or
before the seventeenth day, but not before the fifteenth day, of the
month succeeding the tax period and the details furnished by him under
sub-section (1) shall stand amended accordingly.
(3) Any registered person, who has furnished the details under sub section (1) for any tax period and which have remained unmatched
under section 42 or section 43, shall, upon discovery of any error or
omission therein, rectify such error or omission in such manner as may
be prescribed, and shall pay the tax and interest, if any, in case there is
a short payment of tax on account of such error or omission, in the
return to be furnished for such tax period:
Provided that no rectification of error or omission in respect of the
details furnished under sub -section (1) shall be allowed after furnishing
of the return under section 39 for the month of September following the
end of the financial year to which such details pertain, or furnishing of
the relevant annual return, whichever is earlier.
Explanation . ––For the purposes of this Chapter , the expression
“details of outward supplies” shall include details of invoices, debit
notes, credit notes and revised invoices issued in relation to outward
supplie s made during any tax period.
38. (1) Every registered person, other than an Input Service Distributor or a
non-resident taxable person or a person paying tax under the provi sions of
delete, if required, the details relating to outward supplies and credit or
debit notes communicated under sub -section ( 1) of section 37 to prepare
the details of his inward supplies and credit or debit notes and may
include therein, the details of inward supplies and credit or debit notes
received by him in respect of such supplies that have not been declared by
the supplier under sub -section ( 1) of section 37. Furnishin g details
of inward
supplies.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) Every re gistered person, other than an Input Service
Distributor or a non -resident taxable person or a person
paying tax under the provisions of section 10 or section 51 or
supplies of taxable goods or services or both, including
inward supplies of goods or services or both on which the tax
is payable on reverse charge basis under this Act and inward
supplies of goods or services or both taxable under the
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act or on which
integrated goods and services tax is payable under section 3
of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 , and credit or debit notes
received in respect of such supplies d uring a tax period after
the tenth day but on or before the fifteenth day of the month
succeeding the tax period in such form and manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded
in writing , by notification , extend the time limit for furnishing such
details for such class of taxable persons as may be specified
therein :
Provided further that any extension of time limit notified by the
Commissioner of central tax shall be deemed to be notified by the
Commission er.
(3) The details of supplies modified, deleted or included by
the recipient and furnished under sub -section (2) shall be
communicated to the supplier concerned in such manner and
within such time as may be prescribed.
(4) The details of supplies m odified, deleted or included by
the recipient in the return furnished under sub -section ( 2) or
sub-section ( 4) of section 39 shall be communicated to the
supplier concerned in such manner and within such time as
may be prescribed.

(5) Any regist ered person, who has furnished the details
under sub -section (2) for any tax period and which have
remained unmatched under section 42 or section 43, shall,
upon discovery of any error or omission therein, rectify such
error or omission in the tax period d uring which such error or
omission is noticed in such manner as may be prescribed, and
shall pay the tax and interest, if any, in case there is a short
payment of tax on account of such error or omission, in the
return to be furnished for such tax period:

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

39. [(1) Every registered person, other than an Input Service
Distributor or a non -resident taxable person or a person paying tax
under the provisions of section 10 or section 51 or section 52 shall,
for every calendar month or part thereof, furnish, a return,
electronically, of inward and outward supplies of goods or services
or both, input tax credit availed, tax payable, tax paid and such
other particulars, in such form and manner, and within such time, as
may be prescribed:

Provided that the Government may, on the recommendation s
of the Council, notify certain class of registered persons who shall
furnish a return for every quarter or part thereof, subject to such
conditions and restrictions as ma y be specified therein. ] Furnishing of
returns .
[(2) A registered person paying tax under the provisions of
return, electronically of turnover in the State, inward supplies of
goods or services or both, tax payable, tax paid and such other
particulars in such form and manner, and within such time , as may
be prescribed. ]
(3) Every registered person required to deduct tax at source
under the provisions of section 51 shall furnish, in such form
and manner as may be prescribed, a return, electronically, for
the month in which such deductions have been made within
ten days after the end of such month.
(4) Every taxable person registered as an Input Service
Distributor shall, for every calendar month or part thereof,
furnish, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, a
return, electronically, within thirteen days after the end of
such month.
(5) Every registered non -resident taxable person shall, for
every calendar month or part thereof, furnish, in such form
and manner as may be prescribed, a return, electronically,
within twenty days after the end of a calendar month or
within seven days after the last day of the period of
registration specified under sub -section (1) of section 27,
whichever is earlier.

-------------------
1. Substituted by section 8 (a) (1) of Uk.Act no 13 of 2019.
2. Substituted by section 8 (a) (2) of Uk.Act no 13 of 2019.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6) The Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, by notification, extend the time limit for furnishing
the returns under this section for such class of registered
persons as may be specified therein :
Provided that any extension of time limit notified by the
Commissi oner of central tax shall be deemed to be notified by the
Commissioner.
[(7) Every registered person who is required to furnish a
return under sub -section (1), other than the person referred to in
the proviso thereto, or sub -section (3) or sub -section (5), shall pay
to the Government the tax due as per such return not later than the
last date on which he is required to furnish such return:

Provided that every reg istered person furnishing return under
the proviso to sub -section (1) shall pay to the Go vernment, the tax
due taking into account inward and outward supplies of goods or
services or both, input tax credit availed, tax payable and such
other particulars during a month, in such form and manner, and
within such time, as may be prescribed:

Provi ded further that every registered person furnishing return
under sub -section (2) shall pay to the Govern ment, the tax due
taking into account turnover in the State, inward supplies of goods
or services or both, tax payable, and such other particulars durin g a
quarter, in such form and manner, and within s uch time, as may be
prescribed. ]

---------------------------
1. Substituted by section 8 (b ) of Uk. Act no 13 of 2019.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(8) Every registered person who is required to furnish a
return under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) shall furnish a
return for every tax period whether or not any supplies of
goods or services or both have been made during such tax
period.
(9) Subject to the provisions of sections 37 and 38, if any
registered person after furnishing a return under sub -section
(1) or sub -section (2) sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) or
sub-section (5) discovers any omission or incorrect particulars
therein, other than as a result of scr utiny, audit, inspection or
enforcement activity by the tax authorities, he shall rectify
such om ission or incorrect particulars [in such form and
manner as may be prescribed ] subject to payment of interest
under this Act:

Provided that no such recti fication of any omission or incorrect
particulars shall be allowed after the due date for furnishing of
return for the month of September or second quarter following [the
end of the financial year to which such details pertain ], or the actual
date of furn ishing of relevant annual return, whichever is earlier.

(10) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish a
return for a tax period if the return for any of the previous tax
periods has not been furnished by him.

40. Every registered person who has made outward supplies in the
period between the date on which he became liable to registration
till the date on which registration has been granted shall declare the
same in the first return furnished by him after grant of registration.
First Ret urn.
41. (1) Every registered person shall, subject to such conditions
and restrictions as may be prescribed, be entitled to take the credit
of eligible input tax, as self -assessed, in his return an d such amount
shall be credited on a provisional basis to his electronic credit
ledger. Claim of input
tax credit and
provisional
acceptance
thereof.
(2) The credit referred to in sub -section (1) shall be utilised
only for payment of self -assessed output tax as per the return
referred to in the said sub -sectio n.

------------------------------------
1. Substituted by section 17 (c) (i) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2. Substituted by section 17 (c) (ii) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

42. (1) Th e details of every inward supply furnished by a
registered person (hereafter in this section referred to as the
“recipient ”) for a tax period shall, in such manner and within such
time as may be prescribed, be matched ––
Matching,
reversal and
reclaim of input
tax credit.
(a) with the corresponding details of outward supply
furnished by the corresponding registered person (hereafter in
this section referred to as the “supplier”) in his valid return for
the same tax period or any preceding tax period;

of 1975.
(b) with the integrated goods and services tax paid under
imported by him; and

(c) for duplication of claims of input tax credit.

of 1975 (2) The claim of input tax credit in respect of invoices or
debit notes relating to inward supply that match with the
details of corresponding outward supply or with the integrated
goods and services tax paid under section 3 of the Customs
Tariff Act, 1975 in respect of goods im ported by him shall be
finally accepted and such acceptance shall be communicated,
in such manner as may be prescribed, to the recipient.
(3) Where the input tax credit claimed by a recipient in
respect of an inward supply is in excess of the tax declar ed by
the supplier for the same supply or the outward supply is not
declared by the supplier in his valid returns, the discrepancy
shall be communicated to both such persons in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(4) The duplication of claims of input ta x credit shall be
communicated to the recipient in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) The amount in respect of which any discrepancy is
communicated under sub -section (3) and which is not
rectified by the supplier in his valid return for the month i n
which discrepancy is communicated shall be added to the
output tax liability of the recipient, in such manner as may be
prescribed, in his return for the month succeeding the month
in which the discrepancy is communicated.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6) The amount claimed as input tax credit that is found to
be in excess on account of duplication of claims shall be
added to the output tax liability of the recipient in his return
for the month in which the duplication is commu nicated.
(7) The recipient shall be eligible to reduce, from his output
tax liability, the amount added under sub -section (5), if the
supplier declares the details of the invoice or debit note in his
valid return within the time specified in sub -section (9) of
(8) A recipient in whose output tax liability any amount has
been added under sub -section (5 ) or sub-section ( 6), shall be
liable to pay interest at the rate specified under sub -section ( 1)
of section 50 on the amount so added from the date of
availing of credit till the corresponding additions are made
under the said sub -sections .
(9) Where any reduction in output tax liability is accepted
under sub -section (7), the interest paid under sub -section (8)
shall be refunded to the rec ipient by crediting the amount in
the corresponding hea d of his electronic cash ledger in such
manner as may be prescribed :
Provided that the amount of interest to be credited in any case
shall not exceed the amount of interest paid by the supplier.
(10) The amount reduced from the output tax liability in
contravention of the provisions of sub -section (7) shall be
added to the output tax liability of the recipient in his return
for the month in which such contravention takes place and
such recipient shall be liable to pay interest on the amount so
added at the rate specified in sub -section ( 3) of section 50 .
43. (1) The details of every credit note relating to outward supply
furnished by a registered person (hereafter in this section referred to
as the “supplier”) for a tax period shall, in such manner and within
such time as may be prescribed, be matched –– Matching,
reversal and
reclaim of
reduction in
output tax
liability.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(a) with the corre sponding reduction in the claim for input
tax credit by the corresponding registered person (hereafter in
this section referred to as the “recipient”) in his valid return for
the same tax period or any subsequent tax period; and
(b) for duplication of c laims for reduction in output tax
liability.
(2) The claim for reduction in output tax liability by the
supplier that matches with the corresponding reduction in the
claim for input tax credit by the recipient shall be finally
accepted and communicated, in such manner as may be
prescribed, to the supplier.
(3) Where the reduction of output tax liability in respect of
outward supplies exceeds the corresponding reduction in the
claim for input tax credit or the corresponding credit note is
not declared by the recipient in his valid returns, the
discrepancy shall be communicated to both such persons in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The duplication of claims for reduction in output tax
liability shall be communicated to the supplier in such mann er
as may be prescribed.
(5) The amount in respect of which any discrepancy is
communicated under sub -section (3) and which is not
rectified by the recipient in his valid return for the month in
which discrepancy is communicated shall be added to the
output tax liability of the supplier, in such manner as may be
prescribed, in his return for the month succeeding the month
in which the discrepancy is communicated.
(6) The amount in respect of any reduction in output tax
liability that is found to be on account of duplication of
claims shall be added to the output tax liability of the supplier
in his return for the month in which such duplication is
communicated.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(7) The supplier shall be eli gible to reduce, from his output
tax liability, the amount added under sub -section (5) if the
recipient declares the details of the credit note in his valid
return within the time specified in sub -section ( 9) of section
39.

(8) A supplier in whos e output tax liability any amount has
been added under sub -section (5) or sub-section (6), shall be
liable to pay interest at the rate specified under sub -section ( 1)
of section 50 in respect of the amount so added from the date
of such claim for reduction in the output tax liability till the
corresponding additions are made under the said sub -sections.

(9) Where any reduction in output tax liability is accepted
under sub -section (7), the interest paid under sub -section (8)
shall be refunded to the supp lier by crediting the amount in
the corresponding head of his electronic cash ledger in such
manner as may be prescribed :

Provided that the amount of interest to be credited in any case
shall not exceed the amount of interest paid by the recipient.

(10) The amount reduced from output tax liability in
contravention of the provisions of sub -section (7) shall be
added to the output tax liability of the supplier in his return
for the month in which such contravention takes place and
such supplier shall be liable to pay interest on the amount so
added at the rate specified in sub -section ( 3) of section 50.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

[43.A Procedure for furnishing return and availing input tax credit - (1)
Notwithsta nding anything contained in sub -section (2) of Section
16, section 37 or section 38, every registered person shall in the
returns furnished under sub -section (1) if section 39 verify, validate,
modify or delete the details of supplies furnished by the supp liers.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 41, Section 42 or
recipient and verification t hereof shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The procedu re for furnishing the detail s of o utwards supplies by the
supplier on the common portal, for the purposes of availing input tax
credit by the recipient shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The procedure for av ailing input tax credit in respect of outward
supplies not furnished und er sub -section (3) shall be such as may be
prescribed and such procedure may include the maximum amount of
the input tax credit which can be so availed, not exceeding twenty
percent of the input tax credit available, on the basis of details
furnished by th e suppliers under the said sub -section.
(5) The amount of tax specified in the outward supplies for which the
details have been furnished by the supplier under sub -section (3) shall
be deemed to be the tax payable by him under the provision of the
Act.
(6) The supplier and the recipient of a supply shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay tax or to pay the input tax cred it availed, as the case may
be, in relation to outward supplies for which the details have been
furnished under sub -section (3) or sub -section (4) but return thereof
has not been furnished.
(7) For the purposes of sub -Section (6), the recovery shall be made in
such manner as may be prescribed and procedure may provide for
non-recovery of an amount of input tax credit wrongly availed not
exceeding one thousand rupees.
(8) The procedure, safeguards and threshold of the tax amount in relation
to outward supplies, the details of which can be furnished under sub section (3) by a registered person, -
(i) within six months of taking registration ;
(ii) who has defaulted in payment of tax and where such default has
continued for more than two months from the due date of payment of
such defaulted amount,
Shall be such as may be prescribed.” ] Procedure
for
furnishing
return and
availing
input tax
credit
----------------------------
1. Inserted by section 18 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

[44. (1) Every registered person, other than an Input Service Distributor, a person
paying tax under s ection 51 or section 52, a casual taxable person and a non resident taxable person shall furnish an annual return which may include a
self-certified reconciliation statement, reconciling the value of supplies
declared in the return furnished for the financ ial year, with the audited annual
financial statement for every financial year electronically, within such time
and in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Commissioner may, on the recommendations of the
Council, b y notification, exempt any class of registered persons from filing
annual return under this section:
Provided further that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any
department of the Central Government or a State Government or a local
authority, whose books of account are subject to audit by the Comptroller and
Auditor -General of India or an auditor appointed for auditing the accounts of
local authorities under any law for the time being in force.] Annual
return.
(2) Every registered p erson who is required to get his accounts
audited in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 5) of section
shall furnish, electronically, the annual return under sub -section (1)
along with a copy of the audited annual accounts and a reconciliatio n
statement, reconciling the value of supplies declared in the return
furnished for the financial year with the audited annual financial
statement, and such other particulars as may be prescribed.
45. Every registered person who is required to furnish a return under sub -section
(1) of section 39 and whose registration has been cancelled shall furnish a
final return within three months of the date of cancellation or date of order of
cancellation , whichever is later, in such form and manner as may be
prescr ibed. Final
return.
46. Where a registered person fails to furnish a return under section 39 or section
or section 45, a notice shall be issued requiring him to furnish such return
within fifteen days in such form and manner as may be prescribed. Notice to
return
defaulters.
47. (1) Any registered person who fails to furnish the details of outward or
inward supplies required under section 37 or section 38 or returns required
under section 39 or section 45 by the due date shall pay a late fee of one
hundred rupees for every day during which such failure continues subject to a
maximum amount of five thousand rupees. Levy of
late fee.

----------------- ------------------------------ ----

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(2) Any registered person who fails to furnish the return required
under section 44 by the due date shall be liable to pay a late fee of one
hundred rupees for every day during which such failure continues
subject to a maximum of an amount calculated at a quarter percent. of
his turnover in the State.
48. (1) The manner of approval of goods and services tax
practitioners, their eligibility conditions, duties and obligations,
manner of removal and other con ditions relevant for their functioning
shall be such as may be prescribed. Goods and
service s tax
practitioners.
(2) A registered person may authorise an approved goods and
services tax practitioner to furnish the details of outward supplies
under sectio n 37, the details of inward supplies under section 38 and
the return under section 39 or section 44 or section 45 [and to
perform such other functions] in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (2), the
responsibility for correctness of any particulars furnished in the return
or other details filed by the goods and services tax practitioners shall
continue to rest with the registered person on whose behalf such return
and details are furnished.
CHAPT ER-X
PAYMENT OF TAX

49. (1) Every deposit made towards tax, interest, penalty, fee or any other
amount by a person by internet banking or by using credit or debit
cards or National Electronic Fund Transfer or Real Time Gross
Settlement or by such other mode and subject to such conditions and
restrictions as may be prescribed, shall be credited to the electronic
cash ledger of such person to be maintained in such manner as may be
prescribed. Payment of
tax, interest,
penalty and
other
amounts.
(2) The i nput tax credit as self -assessed in the return of a
registered person shall be credited to his electronic credit ledger,
in accordance with [section 41 or section 43A] , to be
maintained in such manner as may be prescribed.

1. inserted by section 19 of U ttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2. substitu ted by section 20 (a) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(3) The amount available in the electronic cash ledger may be
used for making any payment towards tax , interest, penalty, fees
or any other amount payable under the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder in such manner and subject to such
conditions and within such time as may be prescribed.
(4) The amount available in the electronic credi t ledger may be
used for making any payment towards output tax under this Act
or under the I ntegrated Goods and Services T ax Act in such
manner and subject to such conditions and within such time as
may be prescribed.
(5) The amount of input tax credit available in the electronic
credit ledger of the registered person on account of ––
(a) integrated tax shall first be utilised towards payment of
integrated t ax and the amount remaining, if any, may be
utilised towards the payment of c entral t ax and State tax, or as
the case may be, Union territory tax, in that order;
(b) the central tax shall first be utilised towards payment of central
tax and the amount remaining, if any, may be utilised towards
the payment of integrated tax;
(c) the State tax shall first be utilised towards payment of State
tax and the amount remaining, if any, may be utilised towards
the payment of integrated tax;
[Provided that the input tax credit on account of State tax shall be
utilized towards payment of integrated tax only where t he balance of
the input tax credit on account of central tax is not available for
payment of integrated tax. ]
(d) the Union territory tax shall first be utilised towards
payment of Union territory tax and the amount remaining, if
any, may be utilised to wards the payment of integrated tax;
[Provided that the input tax credit on account of Union territory
tax shall be utilized towards payment of integrated tax only where the
balance of the input tax credit on account of central tax is not available
for pa yment of integrated tax.]
(e) the central tax shall not be utilised towards payment of State
tax or Union territory tax; and
(f) the State tax or Union territory tax shall not be utilised
towards payment of central tax.
------------------------------- --------------------
1. Inserted by section 20 (b) (i) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2. Inserted by section 20 (b) (ii) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6) The balance in the electronic cash ledger or electronic credit ledger
after payment of tax, interest, penalty, fee or any other amount payable
under this Act or the rules made thereunder may be refunded in
accordance with the provisions of section 54.

(7) All liabilities of a taxable perso n under this Act shall be recorded
and maintained in an electronic liability register in such manner as may be
prescribed.

(8) Every taxable person shall discharge his tax and other dues under
this Act or the rules made thereunder in the following or der, namely: ––
(a) self -assessed tax, and other dues related to returns of previous tax
periods;
(b) self -assessed tax, and other dues related to the return of the current
tax period;
(c) any other amount payable under this Act or the rules made
thereu nder including the demand determined under section 73 or section
74.

(9) Every person who has paid the tax on goods or services or both
under this Act shall, unless the contrary is proved by him, be deemed to
have passed on the full incidence of su ch tax to the recipient of such
goods or services or both.
Explanation . ––For the purposes of this section,
(a) the date of credit to the account of the Government in the authorise d bank
shall be deemed to be the date of deposit in the electronic cash ledger ;
(b) the expression, -
(i) “tax dues” means the tax payable under this Act and does not include
interest, fee and penalty; and
(ii) “other dues” means interest, penalty, fee or any other amount payable
under this Act or the rules made thereunder .
[(10) A registered person may, on the common portal, transfer any amount
of tax, interest, penalty, fee or any other amount available in the electronic cash
ledger under this Act, to the electronic cash ledger for integrated tax, central tax,
State tax, or cess, in such form and manner and subject to such conditions and
restriction as may be prescribed and such transfer shall be deemed to be a refund
from the electronic cash ledger under this Act.
(11) Where any amount has been transferred to the electronic cash ledger
under this Act, the same shall be deemed to be deposited in the said ledger as
provided in sub -section (1).]
--------------------------------------------------------
1- Inserted by section 10 of UK Act no. 13 of 2019.

The Uttarakhand Goo ds And Services Tax Act, 2017
[49A Notwithstanding anything contained in section 49, the input tax
credit on acco unt of state tax shall be utilis ed to words payment
of integrated tax or state tax, as the case may be, only after the
input tax credit availa ble on account of integrated tax has first
been utilis ed fully towards such payment. Utilisation
of input tax
credit
subject to
certain
conditions
Order of
utillisation of
input tax
credit 49B. Order of utilisation of input tax credit - Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Chapter and subject to the provision of
clause (e) and clause (f) of sub -section (5) of section 49, the
Government may, on the recommendation of the Council,
prescribe the order and manner of utilisation of the input tax
credit on account of integrated tax, central tax, State tax or
Union territory tax, as the case may be, to words payment of any
such tax. ]

50. (1) Every person who is liable to pay tax in accordance with the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, but fails to pay the
tax or any part thereof to the Government with in the period
prescribed, shall for the period for which the tax or any p art thereof
remains unpaid, pay , on his own, interest at such rate, not exceeding
eighteen per cent. , as may be notifi ed by the Government on the
recommendation s of the Council.
[Provided that the interest on tax payable in re spect of
supplies made during a tax period and declared in the return for
the said period furnished after the due date in accordance with the
provisions of section 39, except where such return is furnished
after commencement of any proceeding under section 73 or
portion of the tax which is paid by debiting the electronic cash
ledger. ] Interest on
delayed
payment of
tax.

(2) The inter est under sub -section (1) shall be calculated, in such
manner as may be prescribed , from the day succeeding the day on
which such tax was due to be paid.
-------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(3) A taxable person who makes an undue or excess claim of
input tax credit under sub -section (10) of section 42 or undue or
excess reduction in output tax liability under sub -section (10) of
such undue or excess reduction, as the case may be, at such rate not
exceeding twenty -four per cent. , as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council.
51. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the
Government may mandate, - Tax
deduction
at source.
(a) a department or establishment of the Central Government
or State Government ; or
(b) local authority; or
(c) Governmental agencies; or

(d) such persons or category of persons as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council,

(hereafter in this sectio n referred to as “the deductor”) , to deduct tax at
the rate of one per cent. from the payment ma de or credited to the
supplier ( hereafter in this section referred to as “the deductee”) of taxable
goods or services or both, where the total value of such supply, under a
contract, exceeds two lakh and fifty th ousand rupees :
Provided that no deduction shall be made if the location of the
supplier and the place of supply is in a State or Union territory which is
different from the State or, as the case may be, Union territory of
registration of the recipient .

Explanation. ––For the purpose of deduction of tax specified above, the
value of supply shall be taken as the amount excluding the central tax,
State tax, integrated tax and cess indicated in the invoice.
(2) The amount deducted as tax under this section shall be paid to the
Government by the deductor within ten days after the end of the month in
which such deduction is made, in such manner as may be prescribed.
[(3) A certificate of tax deduction at source shall be issued in such form
and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.]
(4) [****]
(5) The deductee shall claim credit, in his electronic cash ledger,
of the tax deducted and reflected in the return of the deductor
furnished under sub -section (3) of section 39 , in such mann er as
may be prescribed.
--------------------------------------------
1. Substituted by section 8 (a) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.
2. Omitted by section 8 (b) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6) If any deductor fails to pay to the Government the amount
deducted as tax under sub -section (1), he shall pay interest in
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 50, in
addition to the amount of tax deducted.
(7) The determination of the amount in defau lt under this section
shall be made i n the manner specified in section 73 or section 74.
(8) The refund to the deductor or the deductee arising on account
of excess or erroneous deduction shall be dealt with in accordance
with the provisions of section 54:
Provided that no refund to the deductor shall be granted, if the amount
deducted has been credited to the electronic cash ledger of the deductee.
52. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, every
electronic commerce op erator (hereafter in this section referred to as the
“operator”), not being an agent, shall collect an amount calculated at
such rate not exceeding one per cent. , as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council, of the net value of
taxable supplies made through it by other suppliers where the
consideration with respect to such supplies is to be collected by the
operator.
Collection
of tax at
source.
Explanation . ––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression
"net value of taxable supplies" shall mean the aggregate value of taxable
supplies of goods or services or both, other than service s notified under
sub-section (5) of section 9 , made during any month by all registered
persons through the operator reduced by the aggr egate value of taxable
supplies returned to the suppliers during the said month.
(2) The power to collect the amount specified in sub -section (1)
shall be without prejudice to any other mode of recovery from the
operator.
(3) The amount collected und er sub -section (1) shall be paid to
the Government by the operator within ten days after the end of the
month in which such collection is made, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(4) Every operator who collects the amount specified in sub section (1) sh all furnish a statement, electronically, containing the
details of outward supplies of goods or services or both effected
through it, including the supplies of goods or services or both
returned through it, and the amount collected under sub -section (1)
during a month, in such form and manner as may be prescribed,
within ten days after the end of such month.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

[Provided that the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, by notification, e xtend the time limit for furnishing the
statement for such class of registered persons as may be specified
therein:
Provided further that any extension of time limit notified by the
Commissioner of Central tax shall be deemed to be notified by the
Commiss ioner. ]
(5) Every operator who collects the amount specified in sub section (1) shall furnish an annual statement, electronically,
containing the details of outward supplies of goods or services or
both effected through it, including the supplies of go ods or
services or both returned through it, and the amount collected
under the said sub -section during the financial year, in such form
and manner as may be prescribed, before the thirty first day of
December following the end of such financial year.
[Provided that the Commissioner may, on the recommendations
of the Council and for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification,
extend the time limit for furnishing the annual statement for such c lass
of registered persons as may be specified therein :

Provided further that any extension of time limit notified by the
Commissioner of Central tax shall be deemed to be notified by the
Commissioner. ]
(6) If any operator after furnishing a statement under sub -section
(4) discovers any omission or incorrec t particulars therein, other
than as a result of scrutiny, audit, inspection or enforcement
activity by the tax authorities, he shall rectify such omission or
incorrect particulars in the statement to be furnished for the month
during which such omission o r incorrect particulars are noticed,
subject to payment of interest, as specified in sub-section (1) of
--------------- -------------------------------- -----
1. inser ted by section 12 (a) of Uk.Act no 13 of 2019 .
2. inser ted by section 12 (b) of Uk.Act no 13 of 2019 .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that no such rectification of any omission or incorrect
particulars shall be allowed after the due date for furnishing of
statement for the month of September f ollowing the end of the
financial year or the actual date of furnishing of the relevant
annual statement, whichever is earlier.
(7) The supplier who has supplied the goods or services or both
through the operator shall claim credit, in his electronic ca sh
ledger, of the amount collected and reflected in the statement of
the operator furnished under sub -section (4 ), in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(8) The details of supplies furnished by every operator under
sub-section (4 ) shall be matched with t he corresponding details
of outward supplies furnished by the concerned sup plier
registered under this Act in such manner and within such time as
may be prescribed .
(9) Where the details of outward supplies furnished by th e
operator under sub -section (4 ) do not match with the
corresponding details furnished by the supplier under [section 37
or section 39] , the discrepancy shall be communicated to both
persons in such manner and within such time as may be
prescribed.
(10) The amount in respect of whic h any discrepancy is
communicated under sub -section (9 ) and which is not rectified by
the supplier in his valid return or the operator in his statement for
the month in which discrepancy is communicated, shall be added
to the output tax liability of the sa id supplier, where the value of
outward supplies furnished by the operator is more than the value
of outward supp lies furnished by the supplier, in his return for the
month succeeding the month in which t he discrepancy is
communicated in such manner as may be prescribed.
(11) The concerned supplier, in whose output tax liability any
amount has been added under sub -section ( 10), shall pay the tax
payable in respect of such supply along with interest, at the rate
specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 on the amount so
added from the date such tax was due till the date of its payment.
(12) Any authority not below the rank of Deputy Commissioner
may serve a notice, either before or during the course of any
proceedings under this Act, requiring the o perator to furnish such
details relating to —

----------------------------
1. substituted by section 22 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(a) supplies of goods or services or both effected through such
operator during any period; or
(b) stock of goods held by the suppliers making supplies
through such operator in the godown s or warehouses, by
whatever name called, managed by such operator and declared as
additional places of business by such supplie rs,
as may be specified in the notice.
(13) Every operator on whom a notice has be en served under
sub-section (12 ) shall furnish the required information within
fifteen working days of the date of service of such notice.
(14) Any person who fails to furnish the information required
by the noti ce served under sub -section (12 ) shall, without
prejudice to any action that may be taken under section 122, be
liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty -five thousand
rupees.
Explanation .—For the pur poses of this section, the expression
“concerned supplier” shall mean the supplier of goods or services
or both making supplies through the operator.
53.

[53A. On utilisation of input tax credit availed under this Act for payment of
tax dues und er the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (5 ) of section 49, as
reflected in the valid return furnished under sub -section ( 1) of section
39, the amount collected as State tax shall stand reduced by an amo unt
equal to such credit so utilised and the State Government shall transfer
an amount equal to the amount so reduced from the State tax account
to the integrated t ax account in such manner and within such time as
may be prescribed.
- where any amount has been transferred from the electronic
cash ledger under this Act to the electronic cash ledger under the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act or under the Integrated Goods
and Services Tax Act or under the Goods and Services Tax
(Compensation to States) Act, the Government shall, transfer to the
central tax account or integrated tax account or cess account, an
amount equal to the amount transferred from the electronic cash
ledger, in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. ] Transfer of
input tax
credit.

Transfer of
certain
amounts
-----------------------
1. inser ted by section 13 of Uk.Act no 13 of 2019 .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

CHAPTER XI
REFUNDS
54.

(1) Any person claiming refund of any tax and interest , if any, paid on such
tax or any other amount paid by him, may make an application before the
expiry of two years from the relevant date in such form and manner as may
be prescribed: Refund
of tax.
Provided that a registered person, claiming refund o f any balance in
the electronic ca sh ledger in accordance with the provisions of sub-section
(6) of section 49, may claim such refund in the return furnished under

of 1947. (2) A specialized agency of the United Nations Organization or any
Multilateral Financial Institution and Organization notified under the
United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947, Consulate or
Embassy of foreign countries or any other person or class of persons ,
as no tified under section 55, entitled to a refund of tax paid by it on
inward supplies of goods or services or both, may make an
application for such refund, in such form and manner as may be
prescribed, before the expiry of six months from the last day of th e
quarter in which such supply was received.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (10) , a registered person
may claim refund of any unutilis ed input tax credit at the end of any
tax period:

Provided that no refund of unutilis ed input tax cred it shall be allowed in
cases other than -
(i) zero -rated supplies made without payment of tax;
(ii) where the credit has accumulated on account of rate of tax on inputs
being higher than the rate of tax on output supplies ( other than nil rated or
fully exem pt supplies) , except supplies of goods or services or both as may
be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council :

Provided further that no refund of un utilised input tax credit shall be
allowed in cases where the goods exported out o f India are subjected to
export duty:

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided also that no refund of input tax credit shall be allowed, if the
supplier of goods or services or both claims refund of the integrated tax paid
on such supplies.

(4) The application shall be accompanied by —
(a) such documentary evidence as may be prescribed to establish that a
refund is due to the applicant; and
(b) such documentary or other evidence (including the doc uments
referred to in sectio n 33) as the applicant may furnish to establish that the
amount of tax and interest, if any, paid on such tax or any other amount paid
in relation to which such refund is claimed was collected from, or paid by,
him and the incidence of such tax and interes t had not been passed on to any
other person:
Provided that where the amount claimed as refund is less than two lakh
rupees, it shall not be necessary for the applicant to furnish any
documentary and other evidences but he may file a declaration, based on the
documentary or other evidences available with him, certifying that the
incidence of such tax and interest had not been passed on to any other
person.
(5) If, on receipt of any such application, the proper officer is
satisfied that the whole or part of the amount claimed as refund is
refundable, he may make an order accordingly and the amount so
determined shall be credited to the Fund referred to in section 57.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in su b-section (5) , the
proper officer may, in the case of any claim for refund on account of
zero-rated supply of goods or services or both made by registered
persons, other than such category of registered persons as may be
notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council,
refund on a provisional basis, ninety per cent. of the total amount so
claimed, excluding the amount of input tax credit provisionally
accepted, in such manner and subject to such conditions, limitations
and safeguards as may be prescribed and thereafter make an order
under sub -section (5) for final settlement of the refund claim after due
verification of documents furnished by the applicant.
(7) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section (5)
within sixty days from the date of receipt of applica tion complete in
all respects.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (5), the
refundable amount shall, instead of being credited to the Fund, be
paid to the applicant, if such amount is relatable to –
(a) refund of tax paid on [export] or on inputs or input services used
in making [such export] ;
(b) refund of unutilised input tax credit under sub -section (3);
(c) refund of tax paid on a supply which is not provided, eithe r
wholly or partially, and for which invoice has not been issued , or where a
refund voucher has been issued ;
(d) refund of tax in pursuance of section 77;
(e) the tax and interest, if any, or any other amount paid by the
applicant, if he had not pa ssed on the incidence of such tax and interest
to any other person; or
(f) the tax or interest borne by such o ther class of applicants as the
Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by
notification, specify.
[(8A) Where the Central Gove rnment has disbursed the refund of State
tax, the Government shall transfer an amount equal to the amount so
refunded, to the Central Government. ]

(9) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
judgment, decree, order or direction of the Appellate Tribunal or any
court or in any other provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder
or in any other law for the time being in force, no refund shall be made
except in accordance with the provisions of sub -section (8).
(10) Where any re fund is due under sub -section (3) to a registered
person who has defaulted in furnishing any return or who is required to
pay any tax, interest or penalty, which has not been stayed by any court,
Tribunal or Appellate Authority by the specified date, the p roper officer
may—
(a) withhold payment of refund due until the said person has
furnished the return or paid the tax, interest or penalty, as the case may
be;
(b) deduct from the refund due, any tax, interest, penalty, fee or any
other amount which the taxable person is liable to pay but which remains
unpaid under this Act or under the existing law .
---------------------------------------
1. substituted by section 23 (a ) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2. inser ted by section 14 of Uk.Act no 13 of 2019 .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression
“specified date” shall mean the last date for filing an appeal under this
Act.
(11) Where an order giving rise to a refund is t he subject
matter of an appeal or further proceedings or where any other
proceedings under this Act is pending and the Commissioner is
of the opinion that grant of such refund is likely to adversely
affect the revenue in the said appeal or other proceeding s on
account of malfeasance or fraud committed, he may, after giving
the taxable person an opportunity of being heard, withhold the
refund till such time as he may determine.
(12) Where a refund is withheld under sub -section (11), the
taxable person sha ll, notwithstanding anything contained in
per cent. as may be notified on the recommendations of the
Council , if as a result of the appeal or further proceedings he
becomes entitled to refu nd.
(13) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
section, the amount of advance tax deposited by a casual taxable
person or a non -resident taxable person under sub -section (2) of
respect of the entire period for which the certificate of
registration granted to him had remained in force, furnished all
the returns required under section 39.

(14) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no
refund under sub -section (5) or sub -sectio n (6) shall be paid to
an applicant, if the amount is less than one thousand rupees.

Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, ––

(1) “refund” includes refund of tax paid on zero -rated supplies
of goods or services or both o r on inputs or input services used in
making such zero -rated supplies , or refund of tax on the supply of
goods regarded as deeme d exports, or refund of unutilis ed input tax
credit as provided under sub -section ( 3).

(2) “relevant date” means –

(a) in th e case of goods exported out of India where a
refund of tax paid is available in respect of goods themselves
or, as the case may be, the inputs or input services used in such
goods, ––

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(i) if the goods are exported by sea or air, the date on
which the ship or the aircraft in which such goods are loaded,
leaves India; or

(ii) if the goods are exported by land, the date on which
such goods pass the frontier; or

(iii) if the goods are exported by post, th e date of despatch of
goods by the Post Office concerned to a place outside India;

(b) in the case of supply of goods regarded as deemed exports
where a refund of tax paid is available in respect of the goods, the
date on which the return relating to suc h deemed exports is
furnished ;

(c) in the case of services exported out of India where a refund of
tax paid is available in respect of services themselves or, as the case may
be, the inputs or input services used in such services, the date of ––
(i) receipt of payment in convertible foreign exchange[or in Indian
rupees wherever permitted by the Reserve Bank of India] , where the
supply of services had been completed prior to the receipt of such
payment; or
(ii) issue of invoice, where payment for t he services had been
received in advance prior to the date of issue of the invoice;
(d) in case where the tax becomes refundable as a consequence of
judgment, decree, order or direction of the Appellate Authority,
Appellate Tribunal or any court, the da te of communication of such
judgment, decree, order or direction;
[(e) in the case of refund of un utilised input tax credit under
clause (ii) of the first proviso to sub-section (3 ), the due date for
furnishing of return under section 39 for the period in which such claim
for refund arises. ]
(f) in the case where tax is paid provisionally under this Act or the
rules made thereunder, the date of adjustment of tax after the final
assessment thereof;
(g) in the case of a person, other than the suppl ier, the date of
receipt of goods or services or both by such person; and
(h) in any other case, the date of payment of tax.

--------------------------------------------
1. inserted by section 23 (b ) (i) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2. substituted by section 23 (b ) (ii) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
55.

of 1947.

The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by
notification, specify a ny specialized agency of the United N ations
Organization or any Multilateral Financial Institution and Organization
notified under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947,
Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries and any other person or class
of persons as may be specified i n this behalf, who shall, subject to such
conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be entitled to claim a
refund of taxes paid on the notified supplies of goods or services or both
received by them. Refund in
certain
cases.
56. If any tax ordere d to be refunded under sub-section (5) of section 54
to any applicant is not refunded within sixty days from the date of receipt
of application under sub -section (1) of that section, interest at such rate
not exceeding six per cent . as may be specified in the notification issued
by the Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be
payable in respect of such refund from the date immediately after the
expiry of sixty days from the date of receipt of application under the said
sub-section till the date of refund of such tax: Interest on
delayed
refunds.
Provided that where any claim of refund arises from an order
passed by an adjudicating authority or Appellate Authority or
Appellate Tribunal or court which has attained finality and the
same i s not refunded within sixty days from the date of receipt of
application filed consequent to such order, interest at such rate not
exceeding nine per cent. as may be notified by the Government on
the recommendations of the Council shall be payable in respe ct of
such refund from the date immediately after the expiry of sixty
days from the date of receipt of application till the date of refund .
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, where any order of
refund is made by an Appellate Authority, Appe llate Tribunal or any
court against an order of the proper officer under sub -section (5) of
Tribunal or by the court shall be deemed to be an order passed under
the said sub -section (5).

57. The Government shall constitute a Fund, to be called the
Consumer Welfare Fund and there shall be credited to the Fund, ––
Consumer
Welfare
Fund.
(a) the amount re ferred to in sub-section (5) of section 54;

(b) any income from investment o f the amount credited to the
Fund; and

(c) such other monies received by it ,

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

in such manner as may be prescribed.

58. (1) All sums credited to the Fund shall be utilised by the
Government for th e welfare of the consumers in such manner as may
be prescribed.
Utilisation of
Fund.
(2). The Government or the authority specified by it shall
maintain proper and separate account and other relevant records
in relation to the Fund and prepare an annua l statement of
accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consultation with
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

CHAPTER – XII
ASSESSMENT

59. Every registered person shall self -assess the taxes payable under
this Act and furnish a retu rn for each tax period as specified under
Selfassessment .
60. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (2), where the
taxable person is unable to determine the value of goods or services or
both or determine the rate of tax applicable t hereto, he may request the
proper officer in writing giving reasons for payment of tax on a
provisional basis and the proper officer shall pass an order, within a
period not later than ninety days from the date of receipt of such
request, allowing payment of tax on provisional basis at such rate or
on such value as may be specified by him.
Provisional
assessment .
(2) The payment of tax on provisional basis may be allowed, if the
taxable person executes a bond in such form as may be prescribed,
and with s uch surety or security as the proper officer may deem fit,
binding the taxable person for payment of the difference between the
amount of tax as may be finally assessed and the amount of tax
provisionally assessed.

(3) The proper officer shall, within a period not exceeding six
months from the date of the communication of the order issued under
sub-section (1), pass the final assessment order after taking into
account such information as may be required for finalizing the
assessment:

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that the period specified in this sub -section may, on
sufficient cause being shown and for reasons to be recorded in writing,
be extended by the Joint Commissioner or Additional Com missioner
for a further period not exceeding six months and by the
Commissioner for such further period not exceeding four years.

(4) The registered person shall be liable to pay interest on any tax
payable on the supply of goods or services or both under provisional
assessment but not paid on the due date specified under sub -section
(7) of section 39 or the rules made thereunder, at the rate specified
under sub -section (1) of section 50, from the first day after the d ue
date of payment of tax in respec t of the said supply of goods or
services or both till the date of actual payment, whether such amount
is paid before or after the issuance of order for final assessment.

(5) Where the registered person is entitled to a refund consequent to
the order of final assessment under sub -section (3), subject to the
provisions of sub -section (8) of section 54, interest shall be paid on
such refund as provided in section 56.

61. (1) The proper officer may scrutinize the return and related
particulars furnishe d by the registered person to verify the correctness
of the return and inform him of the discrepancies noticed, if any, in
such manner as may be prescribed and seek his explanation thereto .

(2) In case the explanation is found acceptable, the registered
person shall be informed accordingly and no further action shall be
taken in this regard .

(3) In case no satisfactory explanation is furnished within a
period of thirty days of being informed by the proper officer or such
further period as may be permitt ed by him or where the registered
person, after accepting the discrepancies, fails to take the corrective
measure in his return for the month in which the discrepancy is
accepted, the proper officer may initiate appropriate action including
those under sec tion 65 or section 66 or section 67, or proceed to
determine the tax and other dues under section 73 or section 74.
Scrutiny of
returns.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

62. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained i n
return under section 39 or section 45, even after the service of a
notice under section 46, the proper officer may proceed to assess the
tax liability of the said person to the best of his judgement taking into
account all the relevant material which is available or which he has
gathered and issue an assessment order within a period of five years
from the date specified under section 44 for furnishing of the annual
return for the fin ancial year to which the tax not paid relates.

(2) Where the registered person furnishes a valid return within
thirty days of the service of the assessment order under sub -section
(1), the said assessment order shall be deemed to have been
withdrawn b ut the liability for payment of interest under sub -section
(1) of section 50 or for payment of late fee under section 47 shall
continue.

63. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section
or section 74 , where a taxable person fails t o obtain registration
even though liable to do so or whose registration has been cancelled
under sub -section (2) of section 29 but who was liable to pay tax, the
proper officer may proceed to assess the tax liability of such taxable
person to the best of h is judgement for the relevant tax periods and
issue an assessment order within a period of five years from the date
specified under section 44 for furnishing of the annual return for the
financial year to which the tax not paid relates: Assessment
of
unreg istered
persons.
Provided that no such assessment order shall be passed without
giving the person an opportunity of being heard.
64. (1) The proper officer may, on any evidence showing a tax
liability of a person coming to his notice, with the previ ous permission
of Additional Commissioner or Joint Commissioner, proceed to assess
the tax liability of such person to protect the interest of revenue and
issue an assessment order, if he has sufficient grounds to believe that
any delay in doing so may adv ersely affect the interest of revenue: Summary
assessment in
certain
special cases.
Provided that where the taxable person to whom the liability
pertains is not ascertainable and such liability pertains to supply of
goods, the person in charge of such go ods shall be deemed to be the
taxable person liable to be assessed and liable to pay tax and any other
amount due under this section.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) On an application made by the taxable person within thirty day s
from the date of receipt of order passed under sub -section (1) or on
his own motion, if the Additional Commissioner or Joint
Commissioner considers that such order is erroneous, he may
withdraw such order and follow the procedure laid down in section
or section 74.

CHAPTER XIII
AUDIT
65. (1) The Commissioner or any officer authorised by him, by way
of a general or a specific order, may undertake audit of any registered
person for such period, at such frequency and in such manner as may
be presc ribed. Audit by tax
authorities.
(2) The officers referred to in sub -section (1) may conduct
audit at the place of business of the registered person or in their
office.

(3) The registered person shall be informed by way of a notice
not less than fiftee n working days prior to the conduct of audit
in such manner as may be prescribed.

(4) The audit under sub -section (1) shall be completed within a
period of three months from the date of commencement of the
audit:
Provided that where the Commissioner i s satisfied that audit in
respect of such registered person cannot be completed within three
months, he may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the
period by a further period not exceeding six months.

Explanation .––For the purposes of th is sub -section, the expression
“commencement of audit” shall mean the date on which the records
and other documents, called for by the tax authorities, are made
available by the registered person or the actual institution of audit at
the place of business, whichever is later.

(5). During the course of audit, the authorised officer may
require the registered person, ––

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(i) to afford him the necessary facility to verify the books of
account or other documents as he may require;

(ii) to furnish such information as he may require and render
assistance for timely completion of the audit.

(6) On conclusion of audit, the proper officer shall, within
thirty days , inform the registered person, whose records are
audited, about the findings, his rights and obligations and the
reasons for such findings.

(7) Where the audit conducted under sub -section (1) results in
detection of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded,
or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised, the proper officer
may initiate action under section 73 or section 74.

66. (1) If at any stage of scrutiny, inquiry, investigation or any other
proceedings before him, any officer not below the rank of Assistant
Commissione r, having regard to the nature and complexity of the case
and the interest of revenue, is of the opinion that the value has not
been correctly declared or the credit availed is not within the normal
limits, he may, with the prior approval of the Commission er, direct
such registered person by a communication in writing to get his
records including books of account examined and audited by a
chartered accountant or a cost accountant as may be nominated by the
Commissioner. Special audit.
(2) The chartered ac countant or cost accountant so nominated
shall, within the period of ninety days, submit a report of such
audit duly signed and certified by him to the said Assistant
Commissioner mentioning therein such other particulars as may
be specified:
Provided t hat the Assistant Commissioner may, on an application
made to him in this behalf by the registered person or the chartered
accountant or cost accountant or for any material and sufficient
reason, extend the said period by a further period of ninety days.
(3) The provisions of sub -section (1) shall have effect
notwithstanding that the accounts of the registered person have
been audited under any other provisions of this Act or any other
law for the time being in force.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Serv ices Tax Act, 2017

(4) The registered person shall be given an opportunity of being
heard in respect of any material gathered on the basis of special audit
under sub -section (1) which is proposed to be used in any
proceedings against him under this Act o r the rules made thereunder.
(5) The expenses of the examination and audit of records under
sub-section (1), including the remuneration of such chartered
accountant or cost accountant, shall be determined and paid by the
Commissioner and such determina tion shall be final.
(6) Where the special audit conducted under sub -section (1) results
in detection of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded, or
input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised, the proper officer may
initiate action under se ction 73 or section 74.
CHAPTER XIV
INSPECTION, SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST
67. (1) Where the proper officer, not below the rank of Joint Commissioner,
has reasons to believe that –– Power of
inspection,
search and
seizure.
(a) a taxable person has su ppressed any transaction relating to supply
of goods or services or both or the stock of goods in hand, or has claimed
input tax credit in excess of his entitlement under this Act or has indulged
in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder to evade tax under this Act; or
(b) any person engaged in the business of transporting goods or an
owner or operator of a warehouse or a godown or any other place is
keeping goods which have escaped payment of tax or has kept his
accounts or goods in such a manner as is likely to cause evasion of tax
payable under this Act,
he may authorise in writing any other officer of State tax to inspect
any places of business of the taxable person or the persons engaged in the
business o f transporting goods or the owner or the operator of warehouse
or godown or any other place .
(2) Where the proper officer, not below the rank of Joint
Commissioner, either pursuant to an inspection carried out under sub section (1) or otherwise, has rea sons to believe that any goods liable to
confiscation or any documents or books or things, which in his opinion
shall be useful for or relevant to any proceedings under this Act, are
secreted in any place, he may authorise in writing any other officer of S tate
tax to search and seize or may himself search and seize such goods,

documents or books or things:
The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such goods,
the proper officer , or any office r authorised by him, may serve on the
owner or the custodian of the goods an order that he shall not remove,
part with, or otherwise deal with the goods except with the previous
permission of such officer:
Provided further that the documents or books o r things so seized
shall be retained by such officer only for so long as may be necessary
for their examination and for any inquiry or proceedings under this Act.
(3) The documents, books or things referred to in sub -section
(2) or any other documents, books or things produced by a
taxable person or any other person, which have not been relied
upon for the issue of notice under this Act or the rules made
thereunder, shall be returned to such person within a period not
exceeding thirty days of the issue of the said notice.
(4) The officer authorised under sub -section (2) shall have the
power to seal or break open the door of any premises or to break
open any almirah , electronic devices, box, receptacle in which
any goods, accounts, registers or docume nts of the person are
suspected to be concealed, where access to such premises,
almirah , electronic devices, box or receptacle is denied.
(5) The person from whose custody any documents are seized
under sub -section (2) shall be entitled to make copies thereof or
take extracts therefrom in the presence of an authorised officer at
such place and time as such officer may indicate in this behalf
except where making such copies or taking such extracts may, in
the opinion of the proper officer, prejudicially affect the
investigation.
(6) The goods so seized under sub -section (2) shall be released,
on a provisional basis, upon execution of a bond and furnishing
of a security, in such manner and of such quantum, respectively,
as may be prescribed or on paymen t of applicable tax, interest
and penalty payable, as the case may be.
(7) Where any goods are seized under sub -section (2) and no
notice in respect thereof is given within six months of the seizure
of the goods, the goods shall be returned to the perso n from
whose possession they were seized:

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause
being shown, be extended by the proper officer for a further period not
exceeding six mon ths.
(8) The Government may, having regard to the perishable or
hazardous nature of any goods, depreciation in the value of the
goods with the passage of time, constraints of storage space for
the goods or any other relevant considerations, by notificat ion,
specify the goods or class of goods which shall, as soon as may be
after its seizure under sub -section (2), be disposed of by the
proper officer in such manner as may be prescribed.
(9) Where any goods, being goods specified under sub -section
(8), have been seized by a proper officer , or any officer authorised
by him under sub -section (2), he shall prepare an inventory of
such goods in such manner as may be prescribed.
of 1974. (10) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
relati ng to search and seizure, shall, so far as may be, apply to
search and seizure under this section subject to the modification
that sub -section (5) of section 165 of the said Code shall have
effect as if for the word “Magistrate ”, wherever it occurs, the
word “Commissioner” were substituted.
(11) Where the proper officer has reasons to believe that any
person has evaded or is attempting to evade the payment of any
tax, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, seize the
accounts, registers or docume nts of such person produced before
him and shall grant a receipt for the same, and shall retain the
same for so long as may be necessary in connection with any
proceedings under this Act or the rules made thereunder for
prosecution.
(12) The Com missione r or an officer authoris ed by him may
cause purchase of any goods or service s or both by any person
authoris ed by him from the business premises of any taxable
person, to check the issue of tax invoices or bills of supply by
such taxable person, and on ret urn of goods so purchased by such
officer, such taxable person or any person in charge of the
business premises shall refund the amount so paid towards the
goods after cancelling any tax invoice or bill of supply issued
earlier.
68. (1) The Government may require the person in charge of a
conveyance carrying any consignment of goods of value
exceeding such amount as may be specified to carry with him
such documents and such devices as may be prescribed. Inspection
of goods in
movement.

The Uttarakhan d Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) The details of documents required to be carried under sub section (1) shall be validated in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) Where any conveyance referred to in sub -section (1) is
intercepted by the proper officer at any place, he may require the
person in charge of the said conveyance to produce the
documents prescribed under the said sub-section and devices for
verification, and the said person shall be liable to produce the
documents and devices and also allow the inspection of goods.
69. (1) Where the Commissioner has reasons to believe that a
person has committed any offence specified in clause (a) or clause (b)
or clause (c) or clause (d) of sub -section (1) of section 132 which is
punishab le under clause (i) or (ii) of sub -section (1) , or sub -section (2)
of the said section , he may, by order, authorise any officer of State
tax to arrest such person. Power to
arrest
(2) Where a person is arrested under sub -section (1) for an
offence sp ecified under sub -section ( 5) of section 132, the
officer authorised to arrest the person shall inform such person
of the grounds of a rrest and produce him before a M agistrate
within twenty four hours.

of 1974. (3) Subject to the provisions of t he Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, --
(a) where a person is arrested under sub -section (1) for any offence
specified unde r sub -section ( 4) of section 132, he shall be admitted to
bail or in default of bail, f orwarded to the custody of the M agistrate;

(b) in the case of a non -cognizable and bailable offence, the
Deputy Commissioner or the Assistant Commissioner shall, for the
purpose of releasing an arrested person on bail or otherwise, have the
same powers and be subject to the same provisions as an off icer-incharge of a police station .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

70. (1) The proper officer under this Act shall have power to
summon any person whose attendance he considers necessary either to
give evidence or to produc e a document or any other thing in any
inquiry in the same manner, as provided in the case of a civil court
under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Power to
summon
persons to
give
evidence and
produce
documents.

of 1860. (2) Ever y such inquiry referred to in sub -section (1) shall be
deemed to be a “judicial proceedings ” within the meaning of
71. (1) Any officer under this Act , authorised by the proper officer
not below the r ank of Joint Commissioner , shall have access to any
place of business of a registered person to inspect books of account,
documents, computers, computer programs, computer software
whether installed in a computer or otherwise and such other things as
he ma y require and which may be available at such place, for the
purposes of carrying out any audit, scrutiny, verification and checks as
may be necessary to safeguard the interest of revenue. Access to
business
premises.
(2) Every person in charge of place r eferred to in sub -section
(1) shall, on demand, make a vailable to the officer authoris ed
under sub -section (1) or the audit party deputed by the proper
officer or a cost accountant or chartered accountant nominated
under section 66––

(i) such records as prepared or maintained by the registered
person and declared to the proper officer in such manner as may
be prescribed;

(ii) trial balance or its equivalent;

(iii) statements of annual financial accounts, duly audited,
wherever required;

of 2013. (iv) cost audit report, if any, under section 148 of the
Companies Act, 2013;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

of 1961. (v) the income -tax audit report, if any, under section 44AB of
the Income -tax Act, 1961; and

(vi) any other relevant record ,

for the scrutiny by the officer or audit party or the chartered
accountant or cost accountant within a period not exceeding fifteen
working days from the day when such demand is made, or such
further period as may be allowe d by the said officer or the audit
party or the chartered accountant or cost accountant.

72. (1) All officers of Police, Railways, Customs , and those
officers engaged in the collection of land revenue, including village
officers, officers of central tax and officers of the Union territory
tax shall assist the proper officers in the implementation of this Act. Officers to
assist proper
officers.
(2) The Government may, by notification, empower and
require any other class of officers to assist the proper officers
in the implementation of this Act when called upon to do so by
the Commissioner.

CHAPTER XV
DEMANDS AND RECOVERY

73. (1) Where it appears to the proper officer that any tax has not
been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded, or whe re input tax
credit ha s been wrongly availed or utilis ed for any reason, other than
the reason of fraud or any wilful misstatement or suppression of
facts to evade tax, he shall serve notice on the person chargeable
with tax which has not been so paid or w hich has been so short paid
or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, or who has
wrongly availed or utilised input tax credit, requiring him to show
cause as to why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice
along with interest payable the reon under section 50 and a penalty
leviable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder.
Determination
of tax not paid
or short paid or
erroneously
refunded or
input tax credit
wrongly
availed or
utilis ed for any
reason other
than fraud or
any wilful
misstatement
or suppression
of facts.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub section ( 1) at least three months prior to the time limit
specified in sub -section (10) for issuance of order.
(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub section (1), the proper officer may serve a statement,
containing the details of tax not paid or short paid or
erroneously refunded or input tax credit wrongly availed or
utilis ed for such periods other than those covered under sub section (1), on the person chargeable with tax.
(4) The service of such statement shall be deemed to be
service of notice on such person under sub -section (1), subject
to the condition that t he grounds relied upon for such tax
periods other than those covered under sub -section (1) are the
same as are mentioned in the earlier notice.
(5) The person chargeable with tax may, before service of
notice under sub -section (1) or, as the case may be , the
statement under sub -section ( 3), pay the amount of tax along
with interest payable thereon under section 50 on the basis of
his own ascertainment of such tax or the tax as ascertained by
the proper officer and inform the proper officer in writing of
such payment.
(6) The proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall
not serve any notice under sub -section (1) or, as the case may
be, th e statement under sub -section (3 ), in respect of the tax so
paid or any penalty payable under the provision s of this Act or
the rules made thereunder .
(7) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount
paid under sub -section ( 5) falls short of the amount actually
payable, he shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in
sub-section (1) in respect of such amount which falls short of
the amount actually payable.
(8) Where any person chargeable with tax under sub -section
(1) or sub -section ( 3) pays the said tax along with interest
payable under section 50 within thirty days of issue of sho w
cause notice, no penalty shall be payable and all proceedings
in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(9) The proper officer shall, after considering the
representation, if any, made by person chargeable with tax,
determine the amount of tax, interest and a penalty equivalent
to ten per cent. of tax or ten thousand rupees, whichever is
higher, due from such person and issue an order.
(10) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub section (9 ) within three years from the due date for furnishing
of annual return for the financial year to which the tax not paid
or short paid or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilis ed
relates to or within three years from the da te of erroneous
refund.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (6)
or sub -section (8), penalty under sub-section (9) shall be
payable where any amount of self -assessed tax or any amount
collected as tax has not been paid within a period of thirty days
from the due date of payment of such tax.
74. (1) Where it appears to the proper officer that any tax has not
been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or where input tax
credit has been wrongly availed or utilised by reason of fraud , or any
wilful misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, he shall
serve notice on the person chargeable with tax which has not been
so paid or which has been so short paid or to whom the refund has
erroneously been made, or who has wrongly availe d or utilised input
tax credit , requiring him to show cause as to why he should not pay
the amount specified in the notice along with interest payable
thereon under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to the tax
specified in the notice.
Determination
of tax not paid
or short paid or
erroneously
refunded or
input tax credit
wrongly
availed or
utilised by
reason of fraud
or any wilful
misstatement
or suppression
of facts.
(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub section (1) at least six mont hs prior to the time l imit specified
in sub -section (10 ) for issuance of order.
(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub section (1), the proper officer may serve a statement,
containing the details of tax not paid or short paid or
erroneously refunded or input tax credit wrongly availed or
utilised for such periods other than those covered under sub section (1), on the person chargeable with tax.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(4) The service of statement under sub-section (3) shall be
deemed to be service of notice under sub -section (1) of section
73, subject to the condition that the grounds relied upon in the
said statement, except the ground of fraud, or any wilful misstatement or suppression of facts to eva de tax, for periods
other than those covered under sub -section (1) are the same as
are mentioned in the earlier notice.
(5) The person chargeable with tax may, before service of
notice under sub -section (1), pay the amount of tax along with
interest pa yable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to
fifteen per cent. of such tax on the basis of his own
ascertainment of such tax or the tax as ascertained by the
proper officer and inform the proper officer in writing of such
payment.
(6) The proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall
not serve any notice under sub -section (1), in respect of the tax
so paid or any penalty payable under the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder.
(7) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount
paid under sub -section ( 5) falls short of the amount actually
payable, he shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in
sub-section (1) in respect of such amount which falls short of
the amount actually payable.
(8) Where any per son chargeable with tax under sub -section
(1) pays the said tax along with interest payable under section
and a penalty equivalent to twenty five per cent. of such tax
within thirty days of issue of the notice, all proceedings in
respect of the said not ice shall be deemed to be concluded.
(9) The proper officer shall, after considering the
representation, if any, made by the person chargeable with tax,
determine the amount of tax, interest and penalty due from
such person and issue an order.
(10) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub section ( 9) within a period of five years from the due date for
furnishing of annual return for the financial year to which the
tax not paid or short paid or input tax credit wrongly availed or
utilised re lates to or within five years from the date of
erroneous refund.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(11) Where any person served with an o rder issued under
sub-section ( 9) pays the tax along with interest payable
thereon under sectio n 50 and a penalty equivalent to fifty per
cent. of such tax within thirty days of communication of the
order, all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be
deemed to be concluded.
Explanation 1.– For the purposes of section 73 and this
sectio n,—
(i) the expression “all proceedings in respect of the said notice”
shall not include proceedings under section 132;
(ii) where the notice under the same proceedings is issued to
the main person liable to pay tax and some other persons, and such
proceedings against the main person have been concluded under
liable to pay penalty under [section s 122 and 125] are deemed to be
concluded .
Explanation 2.––For the purposes of this Act, the expression
“suppression” shall mean non -declaration of facts or information
which a taxable person is required to declare in the return, statement,
report or any other document furnished under this Act or the rules
made thereunder, or failure to furni sh any information on being
asked for, in writing, by the proper officer.
75. (1) Where the service of notice or issuance of order is stayed by an
order of a court or Appellate Tribunal , the period of such stay shall
be excluded in computing the period specified in sub -sections ( 2)
and ( 10) of section 73 or sub -sections ( 2) and ( 10) of section 74, as
the case may be. General
provisions
relating to
determination
of tax.
(2) Where any Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court
concludes that t he notice issued under sub -section (1) of section 74
is not sustainable for the reason that the charges of fraud or any
wilful misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax has not been
established against the person to whom the notice was issued, the
proper officer shall determine the tax payable by such person,
deeming as if the notice were issued under sub -section (1) of section
73.
(3) Where any order is required to be issued in pursuance of the
direction of the Appellate Authority or Appellate T ribunal or a
court, such order shall be issued within two years from the date of
communication of the said direction.
(4) An opportunity of hearing shall be granted where a request is
received in writing from the person chargeable with tax or penalty,
or where any adverse decision is contemplated against such person.
--------------------------------------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(5) The proper officer shall, if suff icient cause is shown by
the person chargeable with tax, grant time to the said person
and adjourn the hearing for reasons to be recorded in writing:
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted for more
than three times to a person during the p roceeding s.
(6) The proper officer, in his order, shall set out the relevant
facts and the basis of his decision.
(7) The amount of tax, interest and penalty demanded in the
order shall not be in excess of the amount specified in the
notice and no de mand shall be confirmed on the grounds other
than the grounds specified in the notice.
(8) Where the Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or
court modifies the amount of tax determined by the proper
officer, the amount of interest and penalty shal l stand modified
accordingly, taking into account the amount of tax so
modified.
(9) The interest on the tax short paid or not paid shall be
payable whether or not specified in the order determining the
tax liability.
(10) The adjudication proceeding s shall be deemed to be
concluded , if the order is not issued within three years as
provided for in sub -section ( 10) of section 73 or within five
years as provided for in sub -section ( 10) of section 74.
(11) An issue on which the Appellate Authority or the
Appellate Tribunal or the High Court has given its decision
which is prejudicial to the interest of revenue in some other
proceedings and an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal or the
High Court or the Supreme Court against such decision of the
Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or the High
Court is pending, the period spent between the date of the
decision of the Appellate Authority and that of the Appellate
Tribunal or the date of decision of the Appellate Tribunal and
that of the High Court or the date of the decision of the High
Court and that of the Supreme Court shall be excluded in
computing the period referred to in sub -section ( 10) of section
or sub -section ( 10) of section 74 where proceedings are
initiated by way of issue of a sho w cause notice under the said
sections.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 73 or
accordance with a return furnished under section 39 remains
unpaid, either wholly or partly, or any amount of interest
payable on such tax remains unpaid, the same shall be
recovered under the provisions of section 79.
[Explanation: For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression
‘self- assessed tax” shall include the tax payable in respect of details
of outward supplies furnished under section 37, but not included in
the return furnished under section 39.]
(13) Where any penalty is imposed under section 73 or
imposed on the same p erson under any other provision of this
Act.
76. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any order
or direction of any Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or
court or in any other provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder or any other law for the time being in force , every person
who has collected from any other person any amount as representing
the tax under this Act, and has not paid the said amount to the
Government, sh all forthwith pay the said amount to the
Government, irrespective of whether the supplies in respect of
which such amount was collected are taxable or not. Tax collected
but not paid to
Government.
(2) Where any amount is required to be paid to the
Gove rnment under sub -section (1), and which has not been so
paid, the proper officer may serve on the person liable to pay
such amount a notice requiring him to show cause as to why
the said amount as specified in the notice, should not be paid
by him to the G overnment and why a penalty equivalent to the
amount specified in the notice should not be imposed on him
under the provisions of this Act.
(3) The proper officer shall, after considering the
representation, if any, made by the person on whom the notice
is served under sub -section (2), determine the amount due
from such person and thereupon such person shall pay the
amount so determined.

----------------------------------------------------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(4) The person referred to in sub -section (1) shall in addition
to paying the amount referred to in sub -section (1) or sub section (3) also be liable to pay interest thereon at the rate
specified under section 50 from the date such amount was
collected by him to the date such amount is paid by him to the
Government.

(5) An opportunity of hearing shall be granted where a
request is received in writing from the person to whom the
notice was issued to show cause.

(6) The proper officer shall issue an order within one year
from the date of issue of the notice.

(7) Where the issuance of order is stayed by an order of the
court or Appellate Tribunal, the period of such stay shall be
excluded in co mputing the period of one year.

(8) The proper officer, in his order, shall set out the relevant
facts and the basis of his decision.

(9) The amount paid to the Government under sub -section
(1) or sub -section (3) shall be adjusted against the tax p ayable,
if any , by the person in relation to the supplies referred to in
sub-section (1).

(10) Where any surplus is left after the adjustment under
sub-section (9), the amount of such surplus shall either be
credited to the Fund or refunded to the pers on who has borne
the incidence of such amount.

(11) The person who has borne the incidence of the amount,
may apply for the refund of the same in accordance with the
provisions of section 54.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

77. (1) A registered person who has paid the central tax and State tax
on a transaction considered by him to be an intra -State supply,
but which is subsequently held to be an inter -State supply, shall
be refunded the amount of tax es so paid in such manner and
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed .
Tax
wrongfully
collected and
paid to Central
Government or
State
Government.
(2) A registered person who has paid integrated tax on a
transaction considered by him to be an inter -State supply, but
which is subsequently held to be an intra -State supply, shall
not be required to pay any interest on the amount of State tax
payable .

78. Any amount payable by a taxable person in pursuance of an order
passed under this Act shall be paid by such person wi thin a period of
three months from th e date of service of such order failing which
recovery proceedings shall be initiated:
Initiation of
recovery
proceedings.
Provided that where the proper officer considers it expedient in
the interest of revenue, he may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, require the said taxable person to make such payment
within such period less than a period of three months as may be
specified by him.

79. (1) Whe re any amount payable by a person to the Government under
any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder is not
paid, the proper officer shall proceed to recover the amount by one
or more of the following modes, namely: ––
Recovery of
tax.
(a) the proper officer may deduct or may require any other
specified officer to deduct the amount so payable from any
money owing to such person which may be under the control of
the proper officer or such other specified officer;

(b) the proper offi cer may recover or may require any other
specified officer to recover the amount so payable by detaining
and selling any goods belonging to such person which are under
the control of the proper officer or such other specified officer;

The Uttarakha nd Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(c) (i) the proper officer may, by a notice in writing, require
any other person from whom money is due or may become due
to such person or who holds or may subsequently hold money for
or on account of such person, to pay to the Government either
forthwith upon the money becoming due or being held, or within
the time specified in the notice not being before the money
becomes due or is held, so much of the money as is sufficient to
pay the amount due from such person or the whole of the money
when it is equal to or less than that amount;
(ii) every person to whom the notice is issued under sub clause (i) shall be bound to comply with such notice, and in
particular, where any such notice is issued to a post office,
banking company or an insurer, it shall not be necessary to
produce any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or any other
document for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like
being made before payment is made, notwithstanding any rule,
practice or req uirement to the contrary;
[(iii) in case the person to whom a notice under sub -clause
(i) has been issued, fails to make the payment in pursuance
thereof to the Government, he shall be deemed to be a defaulter in
respect of the amount specified in th e notice and all the
consequences of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall
follow; ]
(iv) the officer issuing a notice under sub -clause (i) may, at
any time, amend or revoke such notice or extend the time for
making any payment in pursuance of the notice;
(v) any person making any payment in compliance with a
notice issued under sub -clause (i) shall be deemed to have made the
payment under the authority of the person in default and such
payment being credited to the Government shall be deemed to
constitute a good and sufficient discharge of the liability of such
person to the person in default to the extent of the amount specified
in the receipt;
(vi) any person discharging any liability to the person in
default after service on him of the noti ce issued under sub -clause
(i) shall be personally liable to the Government to the extent of the
liability discharged or to the extent of the liability of the person in
default for tax, interest and penalty, whichever is less;

------------------------- --

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(vii) where a person on whom a notice is served under sub clause (i) proves to the satisfaction of the officer issuing the notice
that the money demanded or any part thereof was not due to the
person in default or that he did not hold any money for or on
account of the person in default, at the time the notice was served
on him, nor is the money demanded or any part thereof, likely to
become due to the said perso n or be held for or on account of such
person, nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require
the person on whom the notice has been served to pay to the
Government any such money or part thereof ;
(d) the proper officer may , in accordanc e with the rules to be
made in this behalf, distrain any movable or immovable property
belonging to or under the control of such person, and detain the
same until the amount payable is paid; and in case, any part of the
said amount payable or of the cost o f the distress or keeping of
the property, remains unpaid for a period of thirty days next after
any such distress, may cause the said property to be sold and with
the proceeds of such sale, may satisfy the amount payable and the
costs including cost of sa le remaining unpaid and shall render the
surplus amount, if any, to such person;
(e) the proper officer may prepare a certificate signed by him
specifying the amount due from such person and send it to the
Collector of the district in which such person owns any property or
resides or carries on his business or to any officer authorised by the
Government and the said Collector or the said officer, on receipt of
such certificate, shall proceed to recover from such person the
amount specified thereunder as if it were an arrear of land revenue;

of 1974. (f) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the proper officer may file an application
to the appropriate Magistrate and such Magistrate shall proceed to
recover from such person the amount specified thereunder as if it
were a fine imposed by him.
(2) Where the terms of any bond or other instrument
executed under this Act or any rules or regulations made
thereunder provide that any amount due under such instrument
may be recovered in the manner laid down in sub -section (1),
the amount may, without prejudice to any other mode of
recovery, be recovered in accordance with the provisions of
that sub -section.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(3) Whe re any amount of tax, interest or penalty is payable
by a person to the Government under any of the provisions of
this Act or the rules made thereunder and which remains
unpaid, the proper officer of central tax, during the course of
recovery of said tax a rrears, may recover the amount from the
said person as if it were an arrear of central tax and credit the
amount so recovered to the account of the Government.
(4) Where the amount recovered under sub -section (3) is
less than the amount due to the Cent ral Government and State
Government, the amount to be credited to the account of the
respective Governments shall be in proportion to the amount
due to each such Government.
[Explanation - For the purposes of this section, the word person
shall include “d istinct persons” as referred to in sub -section (4) or,
as the case may be, sub -section (5) of section 25. ]
80. On an application filed by a taxable person, the
Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend
the time for payment or allow payment of any amount due under
this Act, other than the amount due as per the liability self -assessed
in any return, by such person in monthly insta lments not exceeding
twenty four, subject to payment of interest under section 50 and
subject to such cond itions and limitations as may be prescribed: Payment of
tax and other
amount in
instalments.
Provided that where there is default in payment of any one
instalment on its due date, the whole outstanding balance payable
on such date shall become due and pa yable forthwith and shall,
without any further notice being served on the person, be liable for
recovery.
81. Where a person, after any amount has become due from him,
creates a charge on or parts with the property belonging to him or
in his possession by way of sale, mortgage, exchange, or any other
mode of transfer whatsoever of any of his properties in favour of
any other person with the intention of defrauding the Government
revenue, such charge or transfer shall be void as against any claim
in respe ct of any tax or any other sum payable by the said person: Transfer of
property to be
void in certain
cases.
Provided that, such charge or transfer shall not be void if it is
made for adequate consideration, in good faith and without notice
of the penden cy of such proceedings under this Act or without
notice of such tax or other sum payable by the said person, or with
the previous permission of the proper officer.
------------------------------------------
1. inserted. by section 24 of Act no 31 of 2018

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
82.

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
any law for the time being in force, save as otherwise provided
in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, any amount
payable by a taxable person or any other person on account of
tax, interest or penalty which he is liable to pay to the
Government shall be a first charge on the property of such
taxable person or such person. Tax to be first
charge on
property.
83. [ (1) Where, after the in itiation of any proceeding under
Chapter XII, Chapter XIV or Chapter XV, the Commissioner is
of the opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interest of
the Government revenue it is necessary so to do, he may, by
order in writing, attach provisionall y, any property, including
bank account, belonging to the taxable person or any person
specified in sub -section (1A) of section 122, in such manner as
ay be prescribed.] Provisional
attachment to
protect revenue
in certain cases.
(2) Every such provision al attachment shall cease to have
effect after the expiry of a period of one year from the date
of the order made under sub -section (1).
84. Where any notice of demand in respect of any tax, penalty,
interest or any other amount payable under this Act, (hereafter in
this section referred to as “Government dues”), is served upon
any taxable person or any other person and any appeal or
revision application is filed or any other proceedings is initiated
in respect of such Government dues, then –– Continuati on
and validation of
certain recovery
proceedings.
(a) where such Government dues are enhanced in such
appeal, revision or other proceedings , the Commissioner shall
serve upon the taxable person or any other person another
notice of demand in respect of the amount by which such
Government dues are enhanced and any recovery
proceedings in relation to such Government dues as are
covered by the notice of demand served upon him before the
disposal of such appeal, revision or other proceedings may,
without the service of any fresh notice of demand, be
continued from the stage at which such proceeding s stood
immediately before such disposal;
(b) where such Government dues are reduced in such
appeal, revision or in other proceedings ––
(i) it shall not be necessary for the Commissioner to
serve upon the taxable person a fresh notice of demand;
(ii) the Commissioner shall give intimation of such
reduction to him and to the appropriate authority with
whom recovery proceedings is pending;
------------- ----------------------------------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(iii) any recovery proceeding s initiated on the basis of the
demand served upon him prior to the disposal of such a ppeal,
revision or other proceedings may be continued in relation to the
amount so reduced from the stage at which such proceedings
stood immediately before such disposal.

CHAPTER XVI
LIABILITY TO PAY IN CERTAIN CASES

85. (1) Where a taxable perso n, liable to pay tax under this Act,
transfers his business in whole or in part, by sale, gift, lease, leave and
license, hire or in any other manner whatsoever, the taxable person and
the person to whom the business is so transferred shall , jointly and
severally , be liable wholly or to the extent of such transfer, to pay the
tax, interest or any penalty due from the taxable person upto the time of
such transfer, whether such tax, interest or penalty has been determined
before such transfer, but has remaine d unpaid or is determined
thereafter. Liability in
case of
transfer of
business.
(2) Where the transferee of a business referred to in sub -section
(1) carries on such business either in his own name or in some
other name, he shall be liable to pay t ax on the supply of goods
or services or both effected by him with effect from the date of
such transfer and shall, if he is a registered person under this Act ,
apply within the prescribed time for amendment of his certificate
of registration.
86. Where an agent supplies or receives any taxable goods on behalf
of his principal, such agent and his principal shall , jointly and
severally , be liable to pay the tax payable on such goods under this Act.
Liability of
agent and
principal.
87. (1) When two o r more companies are amalgamated or merged in
pursuance of an order of court or of Tribunal or otherwise and the order
is to take effect from a date earlier to the date of the order and any two
or more of such companies have supplied or received any goods or
services or both to or from each other during the period commencing
on the date from which the order takes effect till the date of the order,
then such transactions of supply and receipt shall be included in the
turnover of supply or receipt of the resp ective companies and they shall
be liable to pay tax accordingly. Liability in
case of
amalgamatio n or merger
of
companies.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the said order, for
the purposes of this Act, the said two or more companies shall be
treated as distinct companies for the period up to the date of the
said order and the registration certificates of the said companies
shall be cancelled with effect from the date of the said order.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

88. (1) When any company is being wound up whether under the
orders of a court or Tribunal or otherwise, every person appointed as
receiver of any assets of a company (hereafter in this section referred to
as the “liquidator”), shall, within thirty days after hi s appointment, give
intimation of his appointment to the Commissioner. Liability in
case of
company in
liquidation.
(2) The Commissioner shall, after making such inquiry or
calling for such information as he may deem fit, notify the
liquidator within th ree months from the date on which he receives
intimation of the appointment of the liquidator, the amount which
in the opinion of the Commissioner would be sufficient to provide
for any tax, interest or penalty which is then, or is likely thereafter
to bec ome, payable by the company.
(3)When any private company is wound up and any tax, interest
or penalty determined under this Act on the company for any
period, whether before or in the course of or after its liquidation,
cannot be recovered, then every person who was a director of such
company at any time during the p eriod for which the tax was due
shall , jointly and severally , be liable for the payment of such tax,
interest or penalty, unless he proves to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner that such n on-recovery cannot be attributed to any
gross neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation
to the affairs of the company.
89. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act,
2013, where any tax, interest or penalty due fr om a private company in
respect of any supply of goods or services or both for any period cannot
be recovered, then, every person who was a director of the private
company during such period shall , jointly and severally, be liable for the
payment of such t ax, interest or penalty unless he proves that the non recovery cannot be attributed to any gross neglect, misfeasance or
breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the company. Liability of
directors of
private
company.
(2) Where a private company is converted into a public company
and the tax, interest or penalty in respect of any supply of goods
or services or both for any period during which such company
was a private company cannot be recovered before such
conversion, then, nothing conta ined in sub -section (1) shall apply
to any person who was a director of such private company in
relation to any tax, interest or penalty in respect of such supply of
goods or services or both of such private company:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to
any personal penalty imposed on such director.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

90. Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary and any other
law for the time being in force, where any firm is liable to p ay
any tax, interest or penalty under this Act, the firm and each of
the partners of the firm shall , jointly and severally , be liable for
such payment: Liability of
partners of firm to
pay tax.
Provided that where any partner retires from the firm, he o r
the firm, shall intimate the date of retirement of the said partner to
the Commissioner by a notice in that behalf in writing and such
partner shall be liable to pay tax, interest or penalty due upto the
date of his retirement whether determined or not, on that date:
Provided further that if no such intimation is given within
one month from the date of retirement, the liability of such
partner under the first proviso shall continue until the date on
which such intimation is received by the Commissione r.
91. Where the business in respect of which any tax, interest or
penalty is payable under this Act is carried on by any guardian,
trustee or agent of a minor or other incapacitated person on behalf
of and for the benefit of such minor or other incapa citated person,
the tax, interest or penalty shall be levied upon and recoverable
from such guardian, trustee or agentin like manner and to the
same extent as it would be determined and recoverable from any
such minor or other incapacitated person, as if h e were a major or
capacitated person and as if he were conducting the business
himself, and all the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder shall apply accordingly. Liability of
guardians, trustees
etc.
92. Where the estate or any portion of t he estate of a taxable
person owning a business in respect of which any tax, interest or
penalty is payable under this Act is under the control of the Court
of Wards, the Administrator General, the Official Trustee or any
receiver or manager (including any person, whatever be his
designation, who in fact manages the business) appointed by or
under any order of a court, the tax, interest or penalty shall be
levied upon and be recoverable from such Court of Wards,
Administrator General, Official Trustee, rece iver or manager in
like manner and to the same extent as it would be determined and
be recoverable from the taxable person as if he were conducting
the business himself, and all the provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder shall apply accordingl y. Liability of Court
of Wards , etc.
93.

of
(1) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 , where a person, liable to pay tax, interest
or penalty under this Act, dies, then ––
Special provisions
regarding liability
to pay tax, interest
or penalty in
certain cases.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
(a) if a business carried on by the person is continued after his
death by his legal representative or any other person, such legal
representative or other person, shall be liable to pay tax, interest or
penalty due from such person under this Act; and
(b) if the business carried on by the person is discontinued,
whether before or after his death, his legal representative shall be
liable to pay, out of th e estate of the deceased, to the extent to which
the estate is capable of meeting the charge, the tax, interest or
penalty due from such person under this Act,
whether such tax, interest or penalty has been determined before
his death but has remained u npaid or is determined after his death.
of
(2) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016, where a taxable person, liable to pay
tax, interest or penalty under this Act, is a Hindu Undivided
Family or an association of persons and the property of the
Hindu Undivided Family or the association of persons is
partitioned amongst the various members or groups of
members, then, each member or group of members shall ,
jointly and severally , be liable to pay the tax, interest or penalty
due from the taxable person under this Act upto the time of the
partition whether such tax, penalty or interest has been
determined before partition but has remained unpaid or is
determined after the partition.
of
(3) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016, where a taxable person, liable to pay
tax, interest or penalty under this Act, is a firm, and the firm is
dissolved, then, every person who was a partner shall , jointly
and severally , be liable to pay t he tax, interest or penalty due
from the firm under this Act upto the time of dissolution
whether such tax, interest or penalty has been determined
before the dissolution, but has remained unpaid or is
determined after dissolution.
of
(4) [Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016, where a taxable person liable to pay tax,
interest or penalty under this Act, ––
(a) is the guardian of a ward on whose behalf the business is
carried on by the guardian; or
(b) is a trus tee who carries on the business under a trust for a
beneficiary,

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

then, if the guardianship or trust is terminated, the ward or
the beneficiary shall be liable to pay the tax, interest or penalty
due from the taxable person upto the time of the termination of the
guardianship or trust, whether such tax, interest or penalty has
been determined before the termination of guardianship or trust
but has remained unpaid or is determined thereafter. ]
94. (1) Where a taxable person is a firm or an association of
persons or a Hindu Undivided Family and such firm, association
or family has discontinued business ––

(a) the tax, interest or penalty payable under this Act by such
firm, association or family upto the date of such discontinuance
may be determined as if no such discontinuance had taken place;
and
(b) every person who, at the time of such discontinuance,
was a partner of such firm, or a member of such association or
family, shall, notwithstanding suc h discontinuance, jointly and
severally , be liable for the payment of tax and interest determined
and penalty imposed and payable by such firm, association or
family, whether such tax and interest has been determined or
penalty imposed prior to or after su ch discontinuance and subject
as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be,
apply as if every such person or partner or member were himself a
taxable person. Liability in
other cases.
(2) Where a change has occurred in the constitu tion of a
firm or an association of persons, the partners of the firm or
members of association, as it existed before and as it exists
after the reconstitution, shall, without prejudice to the
provisions of section 90, jointly and severally , be liable to
pay tax, interest or penalty due from such firm or association
for any period before its reconstitution.
(3) The provisions of sub -section (1) shall, so far as may
be, apply where the taxable person, being a firm or
association of persons is dissolved or where the taxable
person, being a Hindu Undivided Family, has effected
partition with respect to the business carried on by it and
accordingly references in that sub -section to discontinuance
shall be construed as reference to dissolution or to partitio n.
Explanation .––For the purpose s of this Chapter, ––

-------------------------------------------------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

of 2009 . (i) a “Limited Liability P artnership” formed and
registered under the provisions of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008 shall also be considered as a firm;
(ii) “court” means the District Court, High Court or
Supreme Court .
CHAPTER XVII
ADVANCE RULING

95. In this Chapter, unless t he context otherwise requires, –
(a) “advance ruling” means a decision provided by the
Authority or the Appellate Authority [or the National Appellate
Authority ] to an applicant on matters or on questions specified
in sub -section (2) of se ction 97 or sub -section ( 1) of section 100
[or of section 101C] , in relation to the supply of goods or
services or both being undertaken or proposed to be undertaken
by the applicant;

(b) "Appellate Authority" means the Appellate Authority for
Advance R uling constituted under section 99;

(c) “applicant” means any person registered or desirous of
obtaining registration under this Act;

(d) “application” means an application made to the
Authority under sub -section (1) of section 97;

(e) “Authority” me ans the Authority for Advance Ruling,
constituted under section 96 .
[(f) “National Appellate Authority” means the National
Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling referred to in section
101A” ] Definitions.
96. (1) The Government shall, by notification, constitute an
Authority to be known as the Uttarakhand Authority for
Advance Ruling :
Provided that the Government may, on the
recommendation of the Council, notify any Authority located in
another State to act as the Authority for the State . Constitution of
Authority for
Advance Ruling.
(2) The Authority shall consist of -
(i) one member from amongst the officers of central tax; and

---------------------------------------------------------------------
1-Substituted .by section 15 (a) of Act no 13 o f 2019.
2-Substituted .by section 15 (b) of Act no 13 of 2019 .
3-Substituted .by section 15 (b) (ii) of Act no 13 of 2019 .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(ii) one member from amongst the officers of State tax,

to be appointed by th e Central Government and the State
Government respectively.

(3) The qualifications, the method of appointment of the
members and the terms and conditions of their services
shall be such as may be prescribed.
97. (1) An applicant desirous of obtaining an advance ruling
under this Chapter may make an application in such form
and manner and accompanied by such fee as may be
prescribed, stating the question on which the advance
ruling is sought.
(2) The question on which the advance ruling is sought
under this Act, shall be in respect of, -
(a) classification of any goods or services or both;
(b) applicability of a notification issued under the
provisions of this Act;

(c) determination of time and value of supply of goods or
services or both;
(d) admissibility of inp ut tax credit of tax paid or deemed
to have been paid;
(e) determination of the liability to pay tax on any goods or
services or both;
(f) whether applicant is required to be registered;
(g) whether any particular thing done by the applicant with
respect to any goods or services or both amounts to or results in
a supply of goods or services or both, within the meaning of that
term. Application for
advance ruling.
98. (1) On receipt of an application, the Authority shall cause
a copy thereof to be forwarded to the concerned officer and, if
necessary, call upon him to furnish the relevant records: Procedure on
receipt of
application.
Provided that where any records have been called for by the
Authority in any case, such records shall, as soon as possible, be
returned to the said concerned officer.
The Authority may, after examining the application and the
records called for and after heari ng the applicant or his
authoris ed representative and the co ncerned officer or his
authoris ed representative, by order, either admit or reject
the application:

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that the Authority shall not admit the application where
the question raised in the application is already pending or decided in
any proceedings in the case of an applicant under any of the
provisions of this Act:

Provided further that no application shall be rejected under this
sub-section unless an opportunity of hearing has been given to the
applicant:

Provided also that where the application is r ejected, the reasons
for such rejection shall be specified in the order.
(3) A copy of every order made under sub -section (2) shall be
sent to the applicant and to the concerned officer.
(4) Where an application is admitted under sub -section (2), the
Auth ority shall, after examining such further material as may be
placed before it by the applicant or obtained by the Authority
and after providing an opportunity of being heard to the
applicant or his authorise d representative as well as to the
concerned officer or his authori sed representative, pronounce its
advance ruling on the question specified in the application.

(5) Where the members of the Authority differ on any question
on which the advance ruling is sought, they shall state the point
or points on w hich they differ and make a reference to the
Appellate Authority for hearing and decision on such question.
(6) The Authority shall pronounce its advance ruling in
writing within ninety days from the date of receipt of
application.
(7) A copy of the adva nce ruling pronounced by the Authority
duly signed by the members and certified in such manner as
may be prescribed shall be sent to the applicant , the concerned
officer and the jurisdictional officer after such pronouncement.
99. (1) The Government sh all, by notification, constitute an
Authority to be known as Uttarakhand Appellate Authority for
Advance Ruling for Goods and Services Tax for hearing appeals
against the advance ruling pronounced by the Advance Ruling
Authority : consisting of –
(i) the Ch ief Commissioner of central tax as designated by the
Board; and
(ii) the Commissioner of State tax having jurisdiction over the
applicant . Constitution
of Appellate
Authority
for Advance
Ruling.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of
the Council, notify any Appellate Authority located in another State or
Union territory to act as the Appellate Authority for the State.
The Appellate Authority shall consist of -
(i) the Chief Commissi oner of central tax as designated by the
Board; and
(ii) the Commissioner of State tax having jurisdiction over the
applicant .
100. (1) The concerned officer , the jurisdictional officer or an applicant
aggrieved by any advance ruling pronounced under s ub-section ( 4) of
the
Appellate
Authority.
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be filed within a period
of thirty days from the date on which the ruling sought to be
appealed against is communicated to the concerned officer , the
jurisdictional officer and the applicant:
Provided that the Appellate Authority may, if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by a sufficient cause from presenting the appeal
within the said period o f thirty days, allow it to be presented within a
further period not exceeding thirty days.
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form,
accompanied by such fee and verified in such manner as may be
prescribed.
101. (1) The Appellate Aut hority may, after giving the par ties to the appeal
or reference an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it think s
fit, confirming or modifying the ruling appealed against or referred to . Orders of
Appellate
Authority.
(2) The order referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be passed
within a period of ninety days from the date of filing of the appeal
under section 100 or a reference under sub-section ( 5) of section
98.
(3) Where the members of the Appellate Authority differ on any
point or points referred to in appeal or reference, it shall be
deemed that no advance ruling can be issued in respect of the
question under the appeal or reference.
(4) A copy of the advance ruling pronounced by the Appellate
Authority duly signed by the Members and c ertified in such
manner as may be prescribed shall be sent to the applicant, the
concerned officer, the jurisdictional officer and to the Authority
after such pronouncement .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

[101A.

B . Subject to the provisions of this chapter, for the purposes of this
Act, the National Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling constituted
under section 101A of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act shall be
deemed to be the National Appellate Authority for Advanc e Ruling
under this Act.

(1) Where, in respect of the questions referred to in sub -section (2)
of section 97, conflicting Advance Rulings are give n by the Appellate
Authorities of two or more States or Union territories or both under sub section (1) or sub -section (3) of section 101, any officer authorized by
the Commissioner or an applicant, being distinct person referred to in
National Appellate Authority;
Provided that the officer shall b e from the State in which such
Advance Rulings have been given.
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be filed within a period of
thirty days from the date on which the ruling sought to be appealed
against is communicated to the applicants, concerned offic ers and
jurisdictional officer s:

Provided that the officer authorized by the Commissioner may file
appeal within a period of ninety days from the date on which the ruling
sought to be appealed against is communicated to the concerned officer
or the jurisdictional officer:

Provided further that the National Appellate Authority may, if it
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by a sufficient cause from
presenting the appeal within the said period of thirty days, or as the case
may be, ninety days, al low such appeal to be presented within a further
period not exceeding thirty days.

Explanation - For removal of doubts, it is clarified that the period of
thirty days or as the case may be, ninety days shall be counted from the
date of communication of the last of the confliction rulings sought to be
appealed against.

(3) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form,
accompanied by such fee and verified in such manner as may be
prescribed.

Constitution
of National
Appellate
Authority
for Advance
Ruling

Appeal to
National
Appellate
Authority -

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

101C. (1) The National Appellate Authority may, after giving an
opportunity of being heard to the applicant, the officer authorized by the
Commissioner, al l Principal Chief Commissioners, Chief Commissioner
of Central tax and Chef Commissioner and Commissioner of State tax
of all S tate and Chef Commissioner and C ommissioner of Union
territory tax of all Union territories pass such order as it thinks fit,
confirming or modifying the rulings appealed against.
(2) If the members of the National Appellate Authority differ in
opinion on any point, it shall be decided according to the opinion
of the majority.
(3) The order referred to in sub -section (1) shall be passed as far as
possible within a period of ninety days from the date of filing of
the appeal under section 101 B.
(4) A copy of the Advance Ruling pronounced by the National
Appellate Authority shall be duly signed by the Members and certified
in such manner as may be prescribed and shall be sent to the applicant,
the officer authorized by the Commissioner, the Board, the Chief
Commissioner and Commissioner of State tax of all States and Chief
Commissioner and Commissioner of Union territory tax of all Union
territorie s and to the Authority or Appellate Authority, as the case may
be, after such pronouncement.” ]1
Order of
National
Appellate
Authority -

102. The Authority or the Appellate Authority [Or the National
Appellate Authority] may amend any order passed by i t under section
or section 101 [Or Section 101C] , so as to rectify any error apparent
on the face of the record, if such error is noticed by the Authority or the
Appellate Authority [Or the National Appellate Authority] on its own
accord, or is brough t to its notice by the concerned offic er, the
jurisdictional officer, or the appellant [appellant , the Authority or the
Appellate Authority] within a period of six months from the date of the
order:
Rectificatio n of
advance
ruling.
Provided that no re ctification which has the effect of enhancing the
tax liability or reducing the amount of admissible input tax credit shall
be made unless the applicant or the appellant has been given an
opportunity of being heard.

---------------------
1- Inser ted .by s ection 16 of Act no 13 of 2019.
2- Inserted .by section 17 (a) of Act no 13 of 2019.
3- Inserted .by section 17 (b) of Act no 13 of 2019.
4- Substituted . by section 17 ( c) of Act no 13 of 2019.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

103. (1) The advance ruling pronounced by the Authority or the
Appellate Authority under this Chapter shall be binding only -

(a) on the applicant who had sought it in respect of any matter
referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 97 for advance ruling;

(b) o n the concerned officer or the jurisdictional officer in respect
of the applicant .
[(1A) The Advance Ruling Pronounced by the National
Appellate Authority under this Chapter shall be binding on

(a) the applicants, being distinct persons, who had sought the ruling
under Sub -Section (1) of Section 101B and all registered
persons having the same Permanent Account Number issued
under the Income -tax Act, 1961;
(b) the concerned officers and the jurisdictional officers in respect of
the applicants referred to in ca use (a) and the registered persons
having the same Permanent Account Number issued under the
Income -tax Act, 1961. ] Applicability
of advance
ruling.
(2) The advance ruling referred to in sub -section (1) [and Sub Section (1A)] shall be binding unless the law, facts or
circumstances supporting the original advance ruling have
changed.

104. (1) Where the Authority or the Appellate Authority [or the
National Appellate Authority] finds that advance ruling pronounced by
it under sub -section ( 4) of section 98 or under sub -section (1) of section
[or under section 101C] has been obtained by the applicant or the
appellant by fraud or suppression of material facts or misrepresentation
of facts, it may, by order, declare such ruling to be void ab-initio and
thereupon all the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder
shall apply to the applicant or the appellant as if such advance ruling
had never been made:
Advance
ruling to be
void in
certain
circumstance s.
Provided that no order shall be passed under this sub -section
unless an opportunity of being heard has been given to the applicant or
the appellant .
------------------------
1. Inserted .by section 18 (i ) of Act no 13 of 2019.
2. Inserted .by section 18 (ii ) of Act no 13 of 2019 .
3. Inserted .by section 19 (a ) of Act no 13 of 2019.
4. Inserted .by section 19 (b ) of Act no 13 of 2019.
The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
Explanation .––The period beginning with the date of such

advance ruling and ending with the da te of order under this
sub-section shall be excluded while computing the period
specified in sub -sections (2) and (10) of section 73 or sub sections (2) and (10) of section 74.
(2) A copy of the order made under sub -section (1) shall be
sent to the app licant , the concerned officer and the
jurisdictional officer.
105.

of 1908. (1) The Authority or the Appellate Authority B [Or t he
National Appellate Authority] shall, for the purpose of exercising
its powers regarding –
(a) discovery and inspect ion;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(c) issuing commissions and compelling production of books
of account and other records,
have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908. [Powers of
Authority,
Appellate
Authority and
National
Appellate
Authority. ]
of 1974.

of 1860. (2) The Authority or the Appellate Authority [Or the National
Appellate Authority ] shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of section 195, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and every proceeding
before the Authority or the Appellate Authority shall be deemed to
be a judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and
228, and for the purpose of secti on 196 of the Indian Penal Code.
106. The Authority or the Appellate Authority [Or the National
Appellate Authority] shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter,
have power to regulate its own procedure. [Procedure of
Authority,
Appellate
Authori ty and
National
Appellate
Authority. ]

----------------------------
1. Substitu ted .by section 20 (a ) of Act no 13 of 2019.
2. Inserted .by section 20 (b) of Act no 13 of 2019.
3. Inserted .by section 20 (c ) of Act no 13 of 2019.
4. Substituted . by section 21 (a ) of Act no 13 of 2019.
5. Inserted .by section 21 (b ) of Act no 13 of 2019.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
CHAPTER –XVIII
APPEALS AND REVISION

107. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed
under this Act or the Central Goods and Services Tax Act by an
adjudicating authority may appeal to such Appellate Authority as
may be prescribed within three months from the date on which
the said decision or order is communicated to such person. Appeals to
Appellate
Authority.
(2) The Commissioner may, on his own motion, or upon
request from the Commissioner of central tax, call for and
examine the record of any proceeding in which an adjudicating
authority has passed any decision or order under this Act or the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act, for the purpose of
satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of the said
decision or order and may, by order, direct any officer
subordinate to him to apply to the Appellate Authority within
six month s from the date of communication of the said decision
or order for the determination of such points arising out of the
said decision or order as may be specified by the Commissioner
in his order.
(3) Where, in pursuance of an order under sub -section (2), the
authorise d officer makes an application to the Appellate
Authority , such application shall be dealt with by the Appellate
Authority as if it were an appeal made against the decision or
order of the adjudica ting authority and such authoris ed office r
were an appellant and the provisions of this Act relating to
appeals shall apply to such application.
(4) The Appellate Authority may, if he is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the
appeal within the a foresaid period of three months or six
months, as the case may be, allow it to be presented within a
further period of one month.
(5) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form
and shall be verified in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) No appeal shall be filed under sub -section (1), unless
the appellant has paid –
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and
penalty arising from the impugned order, as is admitted by him;
and
[(b) a sum eq ual to ten percent of the amount of arrear tax in
dispute arising from the said order, in relation to which the appeal
has been filed which may extend maximum upto twenty five crore
rupees :]

-------------------------------------------------
The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

[Provided that no appeal shall be filed against an order
under sub -section (3) of section 129, unless a sum equal to
twenty five percent, of the penalt y has been paid by the
appellant.]
(7) Where the appellant has paid the amount under sub section (6), the recovery proceedings for the balance amount
shall be deemed to be stayed.
(8) The Appellate Authority shall give an opportunity to the
appe llant of being heard.
(9) The Appellate Authority may, if sufficient cause is
shown at any stage of hearing of an appeal, grant time to the
parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing of the appeal for
reasons to be recorded in writing:
Provide d that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three
times to a party during hearing of the appeal.
(10) The Appellate Authority may, at the time of hearing of
an appeal, allow an appellant to add any ground of appeal not
specified in the grou nds of appeal, if it is satisfied that the
omission of that ground from the grounds of appeal was not
wilful or unreasonable.
(11) The Appellate Authority shall, after making such further
inquiry as may be necessary, pass such order, as it thinks ju st
and proper, confirming, modifying or annulling the decision or
order appealed against but shall not refer the case back to the
adjudicating authority that passed the said decision or order:
Provided that an order enhancing any fee or penalty or fine in lieu
of confiscation or confiscating goods of greater value or reducing the
amount of refund or input tax credit shall not be passed unless the
appellant has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
against the proposed order:
Provided f urther that where the Appellate Authority is of the
opinion that any tax has not been paid or short -paid or erroneously
refunded, or where input tax credit ha s been wrongly availed or
utilis ed, no order requiring the appellant to pay such tax or input tax
credit shall be passed unless the appellant is given notice to show
cause against the proposed order and the order is passed within the
time limit specified under section 73 or section 74.

----------------------------------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(12) The order of the Appellate Authority disposing of the
appeal shall be in writing and shall state the points for
determination, the decision thereon and the reason s for such
decision.
(13) The Appellate Authority shall, where it is possible to do
so, hear and decide every appeal within a period of one year
from the date on which it is filed:
Provided that where the issuance of order is stayed by an order of a
court or Tribunal, the period of such stay shall be excluded in
computing the period of one year.
(14) On disposal of the appeal, the Appellate Authority shall
communicate the order passed by it to the appellant, respondent
and to the adjudicat ing authority.
(15) A copy of the order passed by the Appellate Authority
shall also be sent to the Commissioner or the authority
designated by him in this behalf and the jurisdictional
Commissioner of central tax or an authority designated by him
in this behalf.
(16) Every order passed under this section shall, subject to
the provisions of section 108 or section 113 or section 117 or
108. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 121 and any ru les made
thereunder, the Revisional Authority may , on his own motion, or
upon information received by him or on request from the
Commissioner of central tax, call for and examine the record of
any proceedings, and if he considers that any decision or order
passed under this Act or under the Central Goods and Services
Tax Act by any officer subordinate to him is erroneous in so far as
it is prejudicial to the interest of revenue and is illegal or improper
or has not taken into account certain material facts, whether
available at the time of issuance of the said order or not or in
consequence of an observation by the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, he may, if necessary, stay the operation of such
decision or order for such period as he deems fit and after giving
the person concerned an opportunity of being heard and after
making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pass such order,
as he thinks just and proper, including enhancing or modifying or
annulling the said decision or order. Powers of
Revisional
Authority .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) The Revisional Authority shall not exercise any power

under sub -section (1), if ––
(a) the order has been subject to an appeal under section 107 or
(b) the period specified under sub -section (2) of section 107 has
not yet expired or more than three years have expired after the
passing of the decision or order sought to be revised; or
(c) the order has already been taken for rev ision under this
section at an earlier stage; or
(d) the order has been passed in exercise of t he powers under
sub-section (1) :
Provided that the Revisional Authority may pass an order under
sub-section (1) on any point which has not been raised and decided in
an appeal referred to in clause (a) of sub -section (2), before the expiry
of a period of one year from the date of the order in such appeal or
before the expiry of a period of three years referred to in clause (b) of
that sub -section, whichever is later.
(3) Every order passed in revision under sub -section (1) shall,
subje ct to the provisions of section 113 or section 117 or section
118, be final and binding on the parties.
(4) If the said decision or order involves an issue on which the
Appellate Tribunal or the High Court has given its decision in
some other proceedings and an appeal to the High Court or the
Supreme Court against such decision of the Appellate Tribunal
or the High Court is pending, the period spent between the date
of th e decision of the Appellate Tribunal and the date of the
decision of the High Court or the date of the decision of the
High Court and the date of the decision of the Supreme Court
shall be excluded in computing the period of limitation referred
to in claus e (b) of sub -section (2) where proceedings for revision
have been initiated by way of issue of a notice under this
section.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(5) Where the issuance of an order under sub -section (1) is
stayed by the order of a court or Appellate Tribunal, the period
of such stay shall be excluded in computing the period of
limitation referred to in clause (b) of sub -section (2).
(6) For the purposes of this section, the term, ––
(i) “record” shall include al l records relating to any
proceedings under this Act available at the time of examination by
the Revisional Authority ;
(ii) “decision” shall include intimation given by any officer
lower in rank than the Revisional Authority .
109. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, t he Goods and
Services Tax Tribunal constituted under the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act shall be the Appellate Tribunal for hearing
appeals against the orders passed by the Appellate Authority or
the Revisional Authority under this Act . Appellate
Tribunal and
Benches
thereof.
(2) The constitution and jurisdiction of the State Bench and the
Area Benches located in the State shall be in accordance with
the provisions of section 109 of the Central Goods and Services
Tax Act or the rules made thereunder .
110. The q ualification s, appointment, salary and allowances, terms of
office, resignation and removal of the President and Members of
the State Bench and Area Benches shall be in accordance with
the provisions of section 110 of the Central Goods and Services
Tax Act . President and
Members of
Appellate
Tribunal,
their
qualification,
appointment,
conditions of
service, etc.
111.

of
1908. (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not, while disposing of any
proceedings before it or an appeal before it, be bound by the
procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but
shall be guided by the principl es of natural justice and subject to
the other provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the
Appellate Tribunal sh all have power to regulate its own
procedure. Procedure
before
Appellate
Tribunal .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

of
1908. (2) The Appellate Tribunal shall , for the purposes of
discharging its functions under this Act, have the same powers as are
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 , while
trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: —
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;
(b) requiring th e discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

of
1872. (d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or
a copy of such record or do cument from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or
documents;
(f) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte ;
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for
default or any order pass ed by it ex parte ; and
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Any order made by the Appellate Tribunal may be
enforced by it in the same manner as if it were a decree made
by a court in a suit pending therein, and it shall be lawful for
the A ppellate Tribunal to send for execution of its orders to the
court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, —
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered office of
the company is situated; or
(b) in the case of an order again st any other person, the person
concerned voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain.
of
1860.

of
1974. (4) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be
deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of
sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the
Indian Penal Code, and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed
to be civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

The Uttara khand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

112. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed against him under
Services Tax Act may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against
such order within three months from the date on which the order
sought to be appealed against is communicated to the person
preferring the appeal . Appeals to
Appellate
Tribunal.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, in its discretion, refuse to
admit any such appeal where the tax o r input tax credit involved
or the difference in tax or input tax credit involved or the
amount of fine, fee or penalty determined by such order, does
not exceed fifty thousand rupe es.
(3) The Commissioner may, on his own motion, or upon
request from t he Commissioner of central tax, call for and
examine the record of any order passed by the Appellate
Authority or the Revisional Authority under this Act or under
the Central Goods and Services Tax Act for the purpose of
satisfying himself as to the legali ty or propriety of the said order
and may, by order, direct any officer subordinate to him to apply
to the Appellate Tribunal within six months from the date on
which the said order has been passed for determination of such
points arising out of the said o rder as may be specified by the
Commissioner in his order.
(4) Where in pursuance of an order un der sub -section (3) the
authoris ed officer makes an application to the Appellate
Tribunal, such application shall be dealt with by the Appellate
Tribunal as if it were an appeal made against the order under
sub-section (11 ) of section 107 or under sub -section (1) of
application, as they apply in relation to appeals filed under sub section (1).

(5) On receipt of notice that an appeal has been preferred
under this section, the party against whom the appeal has been
preferred may, notwithstanding that he may not have appealed
against such order or any part thereof, file, within forty five days
of the receipt of notice, a memorandum of cross -objections,
verified in the prescribed manner, against any part of the order
appealed against and such memorandum shall be disposed of by
the Appellate Tribunal, as if it were an appeal presented within
the time specified in sub -section (1).

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(6) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal within three
months after the expiry of the period referred to in sub -section
(1), or permit the filing of a memorandum of cross -objections
within forty five days after the expiry of the period referred to in
sub-section (5) , if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause
for not presenting it within that period.
(7) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in such form,
verified in such manner and shall be accompanied by such fee,
as may be prescribed .
(8) No appeal shall be filed under sub -section (1), unless the
appellant has paid ––
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and
penalt y arising from the impugned order, as is admitted by him,
and

(b) [a sum equal to twenty percent of the amount of arrear tax
in dispute, in addition to the amount paid under sub -section (6) of
the Section 107 arising from the said order, in relation to which the
appeal has been filed which may extend maximum upto fifty crore
rupees.]
(9) Where the appellant has paid the amount as per sub -section
(8), the recovery proceedings for the balance amount shall be
deemed to be stayed till the disposal of the appeal.
(10) Every application made before the Appellate Tribunal, ---
(a) in an appeal for rectification of error or for any other
purpose; or
(b) for restoration of an appeal or an application,
shall be accompanied by such fees as may be presc ribed.
113. (1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders
thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or annulling
the decision or order appealed against or may refer the case
back to the Appellate Authority, or the Revisional Authority
or to the original adjudicating authority, with such directions
as it may think fit, for a fresh adjudication or decision after
taking additional evidence, if necessary. Orders of
Appellate
Tribu nal.
----------------------------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, if sufficient cause is shown, at
any stage of hearing of an appeal, grant time to the parties or any
of them and adjourn the hearing of the appeal for reasons to be
recorded in writing:
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than
three times to a party during hearing of the appeal.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may amend any order passed by it
under sub -section (1) so as to rectify any error apparent on the
face of the record, if such error is noticed by it on its own accord,
or is brought to its notice by the Commissioner or the
Commissioner o f central tax or the other party to the appeal
within a period of three months from the date of the order:
Provided that no amendment which has the effect of enhancing an
assessment or reducing a refund or input tax credit or otherwise
increasing the li ability of the other party, shall be made under this sub section, unless the party has been given an opportunity of being heard.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall, as far as possible, hear and
decide every appeal within a period of one year from the dat e on
which it is filed.
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order
passed under this section to the Appellate Authority or the
Revisional Authority, or the original adjudicating authority, as the
case may be, the appellant and the Commi ssioner or the
jurisdictional Commissioner of central tax.
(6) Save as provided in section 117 or section 118, orders passed
by the Appellate Tribunal on an appeal shall be final and binding
on the parties.
114. The State President shall exercise su ch financial and
administrative powers over the State Bench and Area Benches of
the Appellate Tribunal in a State, as may be prescribed:
Financial
and
administrati ve powers
of State
President.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that the State President shall have the authority to
delegate such of his financial and administrative powers as he may
think fit to any other Member or any officer of the State Bench or
Area Bench es, subject to the condition that such Member or of ficer
shall, while exercising such delegated powers, continue to act under
the direction, control and supervision of the State President.
115.

Where an amount paid by the appellant under sub -section (6) of
refunded consequent to any order of the Appellate Authority or of
the Appellate Tribunal , interest at the rate specified under section
shall be payable in respect of such refund from the date of
payment of the amount till the date of r efund of such amount. Interest on
refund of
amount paid
for admission
of appeal.
116. (1) Any person who is entitled o r required to appear before an
officer appointed under this Act, or the Appellate Authority or the
Appellate Tribunal in connection with any proceedings under this
Act, may, otherwise than when required under this Act to appear
personally for examination on oath or affirmation, subject to the
other provisions of this section, appear by an authorised
representative. Appearance
by authorise d
representative
.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the expression “authorised
representative” shall mean a person authorised by the person
referred to in sub -section (1) to appear on his behalf, being —
(a) his relative or regular employee; or
(b) an advocate who is entitled to practice in any court in India,
and who has not been debarred from practicing before any court in
India; or
(c) any chartered accountant, a cost accountant or a company
secretary, who holds a certificate of practice and w ho has not been
debarred from practice; or
(d) a retired officer of the Commercial Tax Department of any
State Government or Union territory or of the Board who,
during his service under the Government, had wor ked in a post
not below the rank than that of a Group -B Gazetted officer for a
period of not less than two years:
Provided that such officer shall not be entitled to appear before
any proceedings under this Act for a period of one year from the
date o f his retirement or resignation; or

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(e) any person who has been authorised to act as a goods and
services tax p ractitioner on behalf of the concerned registered
person.

No person, —

(a) who has been dismissed or removed from Government service;
or

(b) who is convicted of an offence connected with any proceedings
under this Act, the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, the
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory
Goods and Services Tax Act, or under the existing law or under
any of the Acts passed by a State Legislature dealing with the
imposition of taxes on sale of goods or supply of goods or
services or both; or

(c) who is found guilty of misconduct by the prescribed au thority;

(d) who has been adjudged as an insolvent,

shall be qualified to represent any person under sub -section (1) –
–
(i) for all times in case of persons referred to in clause s (a), (b)
and (c); and
(ii) for the period during which the insolvency conti nues in the
case of a person referred to in clause (d ).
(4) Any person who has been disqualified under the provisions
of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act or the Goods and
Services Tax Act of any other State or the Union T erritory Goods
and Servic es Tax Act shall be deemed to be disqualified under
this Act.
117. (1) Any person aggrieved by any order passed by the State Bench or
Area Benches of the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the
High Court and the High Court may admit such appeal , if it is
satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law. Appeal to
High Court.
(2) An appeal under sub -section (1) shall be filed within a period
of one hundred and eighty days from the date on which the order
appealed against is received b y the aggrieved person and it shall
be in such form, verified in such manner as may be prescribed :

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry
of the said period if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for
not filing it within such period.

(3) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial
question of law is involved in any case, it shall formulate that
question and the appeal shall be heard only on the question so
formulated, and the respondents shall, at the hearing of the
appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such
question:

Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to take
away or abridge the power of the cou rt to hear, for reasons to be
recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law not
formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question.

(4) The High Court shall decide the question of law so
formulated and deliver su ch judgment thereon containing the
grounds on which such decision is founded and may award such
cost as it deems fit.

(5) The High Court may determine any issue which –

(a) has not been determined by the State Bench or Area
Benches; or

(b) has been wrongly determined by the State Bench or Area
Benches, by reason of a decision on such question of law as
herein referred to in sub -section ( 3).

(6) Where an appeal has been filed before the High Court, it
shall be heard by a Bench of not less tha n two Judges of the
High Court, and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion
of such Judges or of the majority, if any, of such Judges.

(7) Where there is no such majority, the Judges shall state the
point of law upon which they differ and the c ase shall, then, be
heard upon that point only, by one or more of the other Judges
of the High Court and such point shall be decided according to
the opinion of the majority of the Judges who have heard the
case including those who first heard it.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(8) Where the High Court delivers a judgment in an appeal
filed before it under this section, effect shall be given to such
judgment by either side on the basis of a certified copy of the
judgment.

of 190 8 (9) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to appeals to the
High Court shall, as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals
under this section.
118. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Suprem e Court -

(a) from any order passed by the National Bench or Regional Benches
of the Appellate Tribunal; or Appeal to
Supreme
Court .
(b) from any judgment or order passed by the High Court in an appeal
made under section 117 in any case which, on its o wn motion or on an
application made by or on behalf of the party aggrieved, immediately
after passing of the judgment or order, the High Court certifies to be a
fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court.
of 1908 (2) The provisions of the Code of Civil P rocedure, 1908,
relating to appeals to the Supreme Court shall, so far as may be,
apply in the case of appeals under this section as they apply in
the case of appeals from decrees of a High Court.
(3) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or
reversed in the appeal, effect shall be given to the order of the
Supreme Court in the manner provided in section 117 in the case
of a judgment of the High Court.
119. Notwithstanding that an appeal has been preferred to the High
Court or the Supreme Cour t, sums due to the Government as a
result of an order passed by the National or Regional Bench es of
the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section (1) of section 113 or an
order passed by the State Bench or Area Benches of the Appellate
Tribunal under sub -sectio n (1) of section 113 or an order passed
by the High Court under section 117, as the case may be, shall be
payable in accordance with the order so passed. Sums due to
be paid
notwithstandi ng appeal etc.
120. (1) The Commissioner may, on the recommendations of the
Council, from time to time, issue orders or instructions or
directions fixing such monetary limits, as he may deem fit, for the
purposes of regulating the filing of appeal or application by the
officer of the State tax under the provisions of this Chapter. Appeal not to
be filed in
certain cases.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) Where, in pursuance of the orders or instructions or
directions issued under sub -section (1), the officer of the State
tax has not filed an appeal or application against any decision
or order passed under the provisions of this Act, it shall not
preclude such officer of the State tax from filing appeal or
application in any other case involving the same or similar
issues or questions of law.
(3) Notwithstanding the fact that no appeal or application has
been filed by the officer of the State tax pursuant to the orders
or instructions or directions issued under sub -section (1), no
person, being a party in appeal or application shall contend that
the officer of the State tax has acquiesced in the decision on the
disputed issue by not filing an appeal or application.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal or court hearing such appeal or
application shall have regard to the circumstances under which
appeal or application was not filed by the officer of the State
tax in pursuance of the orders or instructions or directions
issued under sub -section (1).
121. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any provisions of this
Act, no appeal shall lie against any decision taken or order passed
by an officer of State tax if such decision taken or order passed
relates to any one or more of the following matters, namely :– Non
appealable
decisions and
orders.
(a) an order of the Commissioner or other authority empo wered
to direct transfer of proceedings from one officer to another officer;
or

(b) an order pertaining to the seizure or retention of books of
account, register and other documents; or

(d) an order sanctioning
prosecution under this Act; or

(e) an order pas sed under

CHAPTER X IX
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

122. (1) Where a taxable person who –– Penalty for
certain
offences.
(i) supplies any goods or services or both without issue of any
invoice or issues an incorrect or false invoice with re gard to any
such supply;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(ii) issues any invoice or bill without supply of goods or services
or both in violation of the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder;

(iii) collects any amount as tax but fails to pay the same to the
Government beyond a period of three months from the date on which
such payment becomes due ;

(iv) collects any tax in contravention of the provisions of this Act
but fails to pay the same to the Government beyond a period of three
months from the date on which such payment becomes due ;

(v) fails to deduct the tax in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section ( 1) of section 51, or deducts an amount which is less than
the amount required to be deducted under the said sub -section, or
where he fails to pay to the Government under sub -section ( 2) thereof,
the amount deducted as tax;

(vi) fails to collect tax in accordance with the provisions of sub section (1) of section 52, or collects an amount which is less than the
amount required to be colle cted under the said sub -section or where he
fails to pay to the Government the amount collected as tax under sub section (3) of section 52 ;

(vii) takes or utilizes input tax credit without actual receipt of
goods or servic es or both either fully or partially, in contravention of
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;

(viii) fraudulently obtains refund of tax under this Act;

(ix) takes or distributes input tax credit in contravention of

(x) falsifies or substitutes financial records or produces fake
accounts or documents or furnishes any false information or return
with an intention to evade payment of tax due under this Act;

(xi) is liable to be registere d under this Act but fails to obtain
registration;

(xii) furnishes any false information with regard to registration
particulars, either at the time of applying for registration, or
subsequently;

(xiii) obstructs or prevents any officer in discharge of his duties
under this Act;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(xiv) transports any taxable goods without the cover of
documents as may be specified in this behalf;

(xv) suppresses his turnover leading to evasion of tax under this
Act;

(xvi) fails to keep, maintain or retain books of account and
other documents in accordance with the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder;

(xvii) fails to furnish information or documents called for by an
officer in accordance with the pr ovisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder or furnishes false information or documents
during any proceedings under this Act;

(xviii ) supplies, transports or stores any goods which he has
reason s to believe are liable to confiscation under this Act ;

(xix) issues any invoice or document by using the registration
number of another registered person;

(xx) tampers with, or destroys any material evidence or
document s;

(xxi) disposes off or tampers with any goods that have been
detained, seized, or at tached under this Act,
he shall be liable to pay a penalty of ten thousand rupees or an amount
equivalent to the tax evaded or the tax not deducted under section 51
or short deducted or deducted but not paid to the Government or tax
not collected under section 52 or short collected or collected but not
paid to the Government or input tax credit availed of or passed on or
distributed irregularly, or the refund claimed fraudulently , whichever
is higher .
[(1A) Any person who retains the benefit of a trans action covered
under clauses ( i), (ii), (vii) or clause ( ix) of sub -section ( 1) and at
whose instance such transaction is conducted, shall be liable to a
penalty of an amount equivalent to the tax evaded or input tax c redit
availed of or passed on.]

(2) Any registered person who supplies any goods or services
or both on which any tax has not been paid or short -paid or
erroneously refunded, or where the input tax credit has been
wrongly availed or utilized, -

------------------------------------------ -----------------------
1. inser ted by section 9 of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(a) for any reason, other than the reason of fraud or any wilful
misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, shall be liable
to a penalty of ten thousand rupees or ten per cent. of the tax due
from such person, whichever is higher;

(b) for reason of fraud or any wilful misstatement or
suppression of facts to evade tax, shall be liable to a penalty
equal to ten thousand rupe es or the tax due from such person,
whichever is higher.
(3) Any person who ––

(a) aids or abets any of the offences specified in clauses (i ) to
(xxi) of sub -section ( 1);

(b) acquires possession of, or in any way concerns himself in
transportin g, removing, depositing, keeping, concealing, supplying,
or purchasing or in any other manner deals with any goods which he
knows or has reason s to believe are liable to confiscation under this
Act or the rules made thereunder;

(c) receives or is in a ny way concerned with the supply of, or in
any other manner deals with any supply of services which he knows
or has reason s to believe are in contravention of any provisions of
this Act or the rules made thereunder;

(d) fails to appear before the offi cer of State tax, when issued
with a summon for appearance to give evidence or produce a
document in an inquiry;

(e) fails to issue invoice in accordance with the provisions of this
Act or the rules made thereunder or fails to account for an invoice in
his books of account,

shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty five thousand
rupees.

123. If a person who is required to furnish an information return under
issued under sub -section ( 3) thereof, the proper officer may direct ,
that such person shall be liable to pay a penalty of one hundred
rupees for each day of the period during which the failure to furnish
such return continues:
Penalty for
failure to
furnish
information
return.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that the penalty imposed under this section shall not
exceed five thousand rupees.

124. If any person required to furnish any information or return under
failure to
furnish
statistics .
(a) without reasonable cause fails to furnish such information or
return as may be required under that section, or

(b) wi lfully furnishes or causes to furnish any information or
return which he knows to be false,
he shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees and in case of a continuing offence to a further fine which may
extend to one hundred rupees for each day after the first day during
which the offence continues subject to a m aximum limit of twenty five
thousand rupees.

125. Any person, who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or
any rules made thereunder for which no penalty is separately
provided for in this Act, shall be liable to a penalty which may
extend to tw enty five thousand rupees.
General
penalty.
126. (1) No officer under this Act shall impose any penalty for minor
breac hes of tax regulations or procedural requirements and in
particular, any omission or mistake in documentation which is easily
rectifiab le and made without fraudulent intent or gross negligence .
General
disciplines
related to
penalty.
Explanation .––For the purpose of this sub -section, ––

(a) a breach shall be considered a ‘minor breach’ if the amount of
tax involved is less than fiv e thousand rupees;

(b) an omission or mistake in documentation shall be considered
to be easily rectifiable if the same is an error apparent on the face of
record.

(2) The penalty imposed under this Act sha ll depend on the facts
and circumstances of e ach ca se and shall commensurate with the
degree and severity of the breach.

(3) No penalty shall be imposed on any person without giving
him an opportunity of being heard.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(4) The officer under this Act shall while imposing penalty in an
order for a breach of any law, regulation or procedural
requirement, specify the nature of the breach and the applicable
law, regulation or procedure under which the amount of penalty
for the breach has been spe cified.
(5) When a person voluntarily discloses to an officer under this
Act the circumstances of a breach of the tax law, regulation or
procedural requirement prior to the discovery of the breach by the
officer under this Act, th e proper officer may co nsider this fact as
a mitigating factor when quantifying a penalty for that person.
The provisions of this section shall not apply in such cases
where the penalty specified under this Act is either a fixed sum or
expressed as a fixed percent age.

127. Where the proper officer is of the view that a person is liable to a
penalty and the same is not covered und er any proceedings under
penalty after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such
person.
Power to
impose
penalty in
certain
cases.
128. The Government may, by notification, waive in part or full, any
penalty referred to in section 122 or section 123 or section 125 or
any late fee referred to in section 47 for such class of taxpayers and
under such mitigating circumstances as may be specified therein on
the recommendations of the Council.
Power to
waive
penalty or
fee or both
129. [(1) N otwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any
person transports any goods or stores any goods while they are in
transit in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder, all such goods and conveyance used as a means of
transport for carrying the said goods and documents relating to such
goods and conveyance shall be liable to detention or seizure and
after detention or seizure, shall be released, ––
Detention,
seizure and
release of
goods and
conveyance s in transit.
(a) on payment of penalty equal to two hundred percent, of the tax
payable on such goods and, in case of exempted goods, on payment of
an amount equal to two per cent of the value of goods or twenty -five
thousand rupees, whichever is less, where the owner of the goods comes
forward for payment of such tax and penalty;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(b) on payment of penalty equal to the fifty per cent. of the value
of the goods or two hundred percent of the payable on such goods,
whichever is higher, and in case of exempted goods, on payment of an
amount equal to five per cent of the value of goods or twenty five
thousand rupees, whichever is less, where the owner of the goods doe s
not come forward for payment of such tax and penalty;

(c) upon furnishing a security equivalent to the amo unt payable
under clause (a) or clause (b) in such form and manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that no such goods or conveyance shall be d etained or
seized without serving an order of detention or seizure on the person
transporting the goods. ]
(2) [***] .
[(3) The proper officer detaining or seizing goods or
conveyances shall issue a notice within seven days of such detenti on
or seizure, specifying the penalty payable and thereafter, pass an
order within a period of seven days from the date of service of such
notice, for payment of tax and penalty under clause (a) or clause (b)
or of sub -section (1 ).]
[(4) No penalty s hall be determined under sub -section (3)
without giving the person concerned an opportunity of being heard. ]
(5) On payment of amount referred in sub -section (1), all
proceedings in respect of the noti ce specified in sub -section (3) shall
be deemed to be concluded.
[(6) Where the person transporting any goods or the owner of the
goods fails to pay the amount of penalty under sub-section (1) within
fifteen days from the date of receipt of copy of the order passed under
sub-section (3), the goods or c onveyance so detained or seized , shall
be liable to be sold or disposed of otherwise, in such manner and
within such time as may be prescribed, to recover the penalty payable
under sub -section (3) :
Provided that the conveyance shall be releas ed on payment by
the transporter of penalty under sub -section (3) or one lakh rupees,
whichever is less:
Provided further that where the detained or seized goods are
perishable or hazardous in nature or are likely to depreciate in value
with pas sage of time, the said period of fifteen days may be reduced
by the proper officer. ]
----------------------------------------------
1. Omitted by section 11(II) of UK Act no 22 of 2021.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

130.
(1) [Where] any person –
(i) supplies or receives any goods in contravention of any of the
provisions of th is Act or the rules made thereunder with intent to
evade payment of tax; or
(ii) does not account for any goods on which he is liable to pay
tax under this Act; or
(iii) supplies any goods liable to tax under this Act without
having applied for registrat ion; or
(iv) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder with intent to evade payment of tax; or Confiscation
of goods or
conveyances
and levy of
penalty.
(v) uses any conveyance as a means of transport for carriage of
goods in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder unless the owner of the conveyance proves that it was so
used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his
agent, if any, and the person in charge of the convey ance,
then, all such goods or conveyances shall be liable to confiscation
and the person shall be liable to penalty under section 122.

(2) Whenever confiscation of any goods or conveyance is
authorised by this Act, the officer adjudging it shall g ive to the owner
of the goods an option to pay in lieu of confiscation, such fine as the
said officer thinks fit:

Provided that such fine leviable shall not exceed the market
value of the goods confiscated, less the tax chargeable thereon:

Provid ed further that the aggregate of such fine and penalty
leviable shall not be less than the [penalty equal to hundred per cent
of the tax payable on such goods] :

Provided also that where any such conveyance is used for the
carriage of the goods or pa ssengers for hire, the owner of the
conveyance shall be given an option to pay in lieu of the confiscation
of the conveyance a fine equal to the tax payable on the goods being
transported thereon.

------------------------------------------------------- ----------
The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(3) [***] .
(4) No order for confiscation of goods or conveyance or for
imposition of pe nalty shall be issued without giving the person an
opportunity of being heard.
(5) Where any goods or conveyance are confiscated under this Act,
the title of such goods or conveyance shall thereupon vest in the
Government.

(6) The proper officer ad judging confiscation shall take and hold
possession of the things confiscated and every officer of Police, on
the requisition of such proper officer, shall assist him in taking and
holding such possession.

(7) The proper officer may, after satisfying h imself that the
confiscated goods or conveyance are not required in any other
proceedings under this Act and after giving reasonable time not
exceeding three months to pay fine in lieu of confiscation, dispose of
such goods or conveyance and deposit the sa le proceeds thereof with
the Government.
131.

of
1974. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, no confiscation made or penalty imposed under the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall p revent the
infliction of any other punishment to which the person affected
thereby is liable under the provisions of this Act or under any other
law for the time being in force. Confiscation
or penalty not
to interfere
with other
punishments.
132. [(1) Whoever commits, or causes to commit and retain the benefits
arising out of, any of the following offences] , namely: — Punishment
for certain
offences
(a) supplies any goods or services or both without issue of any
invoice , in violation of the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder , with the intention to evade tax ;

--------------------------
1. Substituted by section 10 (i) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.
2. Omitted by section 12(c) of UK Act no 22 of 2021.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(b) issues any invoice or bill without supply of goods or
services or both in violation of the provisions of this Act, or the rules
made thereunder leading to wrongful availment or utilisation of input
tax credit or refund of tax;

[(c) avails input tax credit using the invoice or bill referred to in
clause ( b) or fraudulently avails input tax cred it without any invoice or
bill;]

(d) collects any amount as tax but fails to pay the same to the
Government beyond a period of three month s from the date on which
such payment becomes due;

(e) evades tax, [****] or fraudulently obtains refund and where
such offence is not c overed under clauses (a) to (d) ;

(f) falsifies or substitutes financial records or produces fake
accounts or documents or furnishes any false information with an
intention to evade payment of tax due under this Act;

(g) obstructs or prevents any officer in the discharge of his duties
under this Act;
(h) acquires possession of, or in any way concerns himse lf in
transporting, removing, depositing, keeping, concealing, supplying,
purchasing or in any other manner deals with, any goods which he
knows or has reasons to believe are liable to confiscation under this
Act or the rules made thereunder;

(i) re ceives or is in any way concerned with the supply of, or in
any other manner deals with any supply of services which he knows or
has reasons to believe are in contravention of any provisions of this
Act or the rules made thereunder;

------------------
1. Substituted by section 10 (ii) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.
2. Omitted by section 10 (iii) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(j) tampers with or destroys any material evidence or documents;

(k) fails to supply any information which he is required to supply
under this Act or the rules made thereunder or (unless with a
reasonable belief, the burden of proving which shall be upon him, that
the information supplied by him is true) supplies false information; or

(l) attempts to commit, or abets the commission of any of the
offences mentioned in clau ses (a) to (k) of this section,

shall be punishable ––

(i) in cases where the amount of tax evaded or the amount of
input tax credit wrongly availed or utilise d or the amount of refund
wrongly taken exceeds five hundred lakh rupees, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to five years and with fine;

(ii) in cases where the amount of tax evaded or the amount of
input tax credit wrongly availed or util ised or the amount of refund
wrongly taken exceeds two hundred lakh rupees but does not exceed
five hundred lakh rupees , with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and with fine;

(iii) in the case of any other offence where the amount of tax
evaded or the amount of input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised or
the amount of refund wrongly taken exceeds one hundred lakh rupees
but does not exceed two hundred lakh rupees, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year and wi th fine;
(iv) in cases where he commits or abets the commission of an
offence spec ified in clause (f) or clause (g ) or clause (j), he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with fine or with both.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) Where any person convicted of an offence under this section is
again convicted of an offence under this section, then, he shall be
punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence with
impr isonment for a term which may extend to five years and with
fine.

(3) The imprisonment referred to in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of sub section (1) and sub-section (2) shall, in the absence of special and
adequate reasons to the contrary to be record ed in the judgment of the
Court, be for a term not less than six months.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, all offences under this Act, except the offences
referred to in sub -section (5) shall be non -cogniza ble and bailable.
(5) The offences specified in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) or
clause (d) of sub -section (1) and punishable under clause (i) of that
sub-section shall be cognizable and non -bailable.
(6) A person shall not be prosecuted for any offence under this
section except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner.
Explanation .- For the purposes of this section, the term “tax” shall
include the amount of tax evaded or the amount of input tax credit
wrongly availed or utilised or refund wrongly taken under the
provisions of this Act, the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, the
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, and cess levied under the
Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act.
133. (1) Where any person engaged i n connection with the collection of
statistics under section 151 or compilation or computerisation thereof
or if any officer of State tax having access to information specified
under sub -section (1) of section 150, or if any person engaged in
connection wi th the provision of service on the common portal or the
agent of common portal, wi lfully discloses any information or the
contents of any return furnished under this Act or rules made
thereunder otherwise than in execution of his duties under the said
sections or for the purposes of prosecution for an offence under this
Act or under any other Act for th e time being in force, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with fine which may extend to twenty five thousa nd
rupees, or with both.
Liability of
officers and
certain other
persons.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) Any person –

(a) who is a Government servant shall not be prosecuted for any
offence under this section except with the previous sanction of the
Government;

(b) who is not a Government servant shall not be prosecuted for any
offence under this section except with the previous sanction of the
Commissioner .

134. No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable und er this
Act or the rules made thereunder except with the previous sanction of
the Commissioner , and no court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the
First Class, shall try any such offence.
Cognizance of
offences.
135. In any prosecution for an offence under this Act which requires a
culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the court shall
presume the existence of such mental state but it shall be a defence for
the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental state with
respect to the ac t charged as an offence in that prosecution.
Presumption
of culpable
mental state.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, –

(i) the expression “culpable me ntal state” includes intention,
motive, knowledge of a fact, and belief in, or reason to believe, a
fact;

(ii) a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes it to
exist beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is
established by a preponderance of probability.

136. A statement made and signed by a person on appearance in response
to any summons issued under section 70 during the course of any
inquiry or proceedings under this Act shall be relevant, for the purpose
of proving, in any prosecution for an offence under this Act, the truth
of the facts which it contains, ––
Relevancy of
statements
under certain
circumstances
.
(a) when the person who made the statement is dead or cannot
be found, or is incapable of giving evidence, or is kept out of the
way by the adverse party, or whose presence cannot be obta ined
without an amount of delay or expense which, under the
circumstances of the case, the court considers unreasonable; or

(b) when the person who made the statement is examined as a
witness in the case before the court and the court is of the opinion
that, having regard to the circumstances of the case, the statement
should be admit ted in evidence in the interest of justice.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

137. (1) Where an offence committed by a person under this Act is a
comp any, every person who, at the time the offence was committed
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct
of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro ceeded against
and punished accordingly . Offences by
Companies.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed
with the con sent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
(3) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
taxable person being a partnership firm or a Limited Liability
Partnership or a Hindu Undivided Family or a trust, the partner
or karta or managing trustee shall be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly and the prov isions of sub -section (2) shall mutatis
mutandis apply to such persons.

(4) Nothing contained in this sec tion shall render any such
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
Explanation .––For t he purposes of this section, –
(i) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or
other association of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

138.

of
1974.

(1) Any offence under this Act may, either before or after the
institution of prosecution, be compounded by the Commissioner on
payment, by the person accused of the offence, to the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, of such
compounding amount in such manne r as may be prescribed: Compounding
of offences.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to –

(a) a person who has been allowed to compound once in respect of
any of the offenc es specified in clause s (a) to ( f) of sub -section
(1) of section 132 and the of fences specified in clause ( l) which
are relatable to of fences specified in clause s (a) to (f) of the
said sub -section ;

(b) a person who has been allowed to compound once in res pect of
any offence , other than those in clause (a), under this Act or
under the provisions of any State Goods and Services Tax Act
or the Central Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act or the Integrated Goods
and Serv ices Tax Act in respect of supplies of value exceeding
one crore rupees ;

(c) a person who has been accused of committing an offence under
this Act which is also an offence under any other law for the
time being in force ;

(d) a person who has been convicte d for an offence under this Act
by a court ;
(e) a person who has been accused of committing an offence
specified in clause ( g) or clause (j) or clause (k) of sub -section
(1) of s ection 132; and
(f) any other class of persons or offences as may be prescribed:
Provided further that any compounding allowed under the
provision s of this section shall not affect the proceeding s, if any,
instituted under any other law:

Provided also that compounding shall be allowed only after making
payment of tax, interest and penalty involved in such offences.
(2) The amount for compounding of offences under this
section shall be such as may be prescribed, subject to the
minimum amount not being less than ten thousand rupees or
fifty per cent . of the tax in volved, whichever is higher , and the
maximum amount not being less than thirty thousand rupees or
one hundred and fifty per cent . of the tax, whichever is higher .
(3) On payment of such compounding amount as may be
determined by the Commissioner , no fur ther proceedings shall
be initiated under this Act against the accused person in respect
of the same offence and any criminal proceedings, if already
initiated in respect of the said offence, shall stand abated .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax A ct, 2017

CHAPTER XX
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

139. (1) On and from the appointed day, every person registered under any
of the existing laws and having a valid Permanent Account Number
shall be issued a certificate of registration on provisional basis, subject
to such conditions and in such form and manner as may be prescribed ,
which unless replaced by a final certificate of registration under sub section (2) , shall be liable to be cancelled if the conditions so
prescribed are not complied with.
Migrati on of
existing
taxpayers.
(2) The final certificate of registration shall be granted in such
form and manner and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.
(3) The certificate of registration issued to a person under sub section (1) shall be dee med to have not been issued if the said
registration is cancelled in pursuance of an application filed by
such person that he was not liable to registration under section
or section 24 .
140. (1) A registered person, other than a person opting to pay tax under
credit of the amount of Value Added Tax, if any, carried forward in
the return relating to the period ending with the day immediately
preceding the appointed day, furnish ed by him under the existing law
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed .] Transitional
arrangements
for input tax
credit.
Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit
in the following circumstances, namely: –
(i) where the said amount of credit is not admissible as input tax
credit under this Act; or
(ii) where he has not furnished all the returns required under the
existing law for the period of six months immediately
preceding the appointed date ; or

of
Provided further that so much of the said credit as is attributable to
any claim related to section 3, sub -section (3) of section 5, section 6 ,
Act, 1956 which is not substantiated in the manner, and within the
period, prescribed in rule 12 of the Central Sales Tax (Registration
and Turnover) Rules, 1957 shall not be eligible to be credited to the
electronic credit ledger:
-----------------
1. Substituted by section 11 ( a) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided also that an amount equivalent to the credit specified in the
second proviso shall be refunded under the existing law when the said
claims are substantiated in the manner prescrib ed in rule 12 of the
Central Sales Tax (Registration and Turnover) Rules, 1957.
(2) A registered person, other than a person opting to pay tax under
of the unavailed input tax credit in respect of capital goods, not carried
forward in a return, furnished under the existing law by him, for the
period ending with the day immediately preceding the appointed day
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed:” shall be
substituted and shall always be deemed to have been substituted. ]

Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit
unless the said credit was admissible as input tax credit under the
existing law and is also admissible as input tax credit under this Act.
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, the expression
“unavailed input tax credit” means the amount that remains after
subtracting the amount of input tax credit already availed in respect of
capital goods by the taxa ble person under the existing law from the
aggregate amount of input tax credit to which the said person was
entitled in respect of the said capit al goods under the existing law.
(3) A registered person, who was not liable to be registered under the
existing law or who was engaged in the sale of exempted goods or tax
free goods , [by whatever name called, or goods which have suffered tax
at the first point of their sale in the State and the subsequent sales of
which are not subject to tax in the State un der the existing law but which
are liable to tax under this Act or where the person was entitled to the
credit of input tax at the time of sale of goods, if any, shall be entitled to
take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of the value added tax in
respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or
finished goods held in stock on the appointed day, within such time and
in such manner as may be prescribed, subject to the following
conditions” shall be substituted and shall always be deemed to have been
substituted.]
(i) such inputs or goods are used or intended to be used for making
taxable supplies under this Act;
(ii) the said registered person is eligible for input tax credit on
such inputs under this Act;
----------- -------------------------
1. Substituted by section 11 (b) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.
2. Substituted by section 11 (c) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(iii) the said registered person is in possession of invoice or o ther
prescribed documents evidencing payment of tax under the existing
law in respect of such inputs; and
(iv) such invoices or other prescribed documents were issued not
earlier than twelve months immediately preceding the appointed day :

Provided t hat where a registered person, other than a manufacturer
or a supplier of services, is not in possession of an invoice or any
other documents evidencing payment of tax in respect of inputs, then,
such registered person shall, subject to such conditions, li mitations
and safeguards as may be prescribed, including that the said taxable
person shall pass on the benefit of such credit by way of reduced
prices to the recipient, be allowed to take credit at such rate and in
such manner as may be prescribed.

(4) A registered person, who was engaged in the sale of taxable
goods as well as exempted goods or tax free goods, by whatever
name called, under the existing law but which are liable to tax
under this Act, shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credi t
ledger ,-

(a) the amount of credit of the value added t ax, if any, carried
forward in a return furnished under the existing law by him in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1); and
(b) the amount of credit of the v alue added tax, if any, in respect
of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished
goods held in stock on the appointed day, relating to such exempted
goods or tax free goods , by whatever name called, in accordance with
the provisions of sub-section (3).
[(5) A registered person shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit
ledger, credit of value added tax, if any, in respect of inputs received on
or after the appointed day but the tax in respect of which has been paid
by the supplier unde r the existing law, within such time and in such
manner as may be prescribed, subject to the condition” .]
that the invoice or any other taxpaying document of the same was
recorded in the books of account of such person within a period of
thirty days from the appointed day:
Provided that the period of thirty days may, on sufficient cause
being shown, be extended by the Commissioner for a further p eriod not
exceeding thirty days:
----------------------------------
1. Substituted by section 11 (d) of Uk .Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided further that the said registered person shall furnish a
statement, in such manner as may be prescribed, in respect of credit that
has been taken under this sub -section .
(6) A registered person, who was either paying tax at a fixed rate or
paying a fixed amount in lieu of the tax payable under the existing law
[shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of value
added tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi finished or finished goods held in stock on the appointed day, within
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, subject to the
following conditions .]
(i) such inputs or goods are used or intended to be use d for making
taxable supplies under this Act;
(ii) the said registered person is not paying tax under section 10;
(iii) the said registered person is eligible for input tax credit on
such inputs under this Act;
(iv) the said registered person i s in possession of invoice or other
prescribed documents evidencing payment of tax under the existing
law in respect of inputs; and
(v) such invoices or other prescribed documents were issued not
earlier than twelve months immediately preceding the appo inted day.
(7) The amount of credit under sub -sections (3), (4) and (6) shall
be calculated in such manner as may be prescribed .
141. (1) Where any inputs received at a place of business had been
despatched as such or despatched after being partially processed to
a job worker for further processing, testing, repair, reconditioning
or any other purpose in accordance with the provisions of existing
law prior to the appointed day and such inputs are returned to the
said place on or after the appointed da y, no tax shall be payable if
such inputs, after completion of the job work or otherwise, are
returned to the said place within six months from the appointed
day: Transition al
provisions
relating to
job work.
Provided that the period of six months may, o n sufficient cause
being shown, be extended by the Commissioner for a further period
not exceeding two months:
-------------- ----------------- --------
1. Substituted by section 11 (e) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017
Provided further that if such inputs are not returned within the
period specified in this sub -section, the input tax credit shall be liable

to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of clause (a) of
sub-section (8) of section 142 .
(2) Where any semi -finished goods had been despatched from the
place of business to any other premises for carrying out certain
manufacturing processes in accordance with the provisions of
existing law prior to the appointed day and such goods (hereafter in
this sub-section referred to as “the said goods”) are returned to the
said place on or after the appointed day, no tax shall be payable if
the said goods, after undergoing manufacturing processes or
otherwise, are returned to the said place within six months f rom the
appointed day :

Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause
being shown, be extended by the Commissioner for a further period
not exceeding two months:

Provided further that if the said goods are not returned within a
period specified in this sub -section , the input tax credit shall be liable
to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of clause (a) of
sub-section (8) of section 142 :

Provided also that the person despatching the goods may, in
accordance with the provisions of the existing law, transfer the said
goods to the premises of any registered person for the purpose of
supplying therefrom on payment of tax in India or without payment
of tax for exports within the period specified in this sub -section .

(3) Where any goods had been despatched from the place of
business without payment of tax for carrying out tests or any other
process, to any other premises, whether registered or not, in
accordance with the provisions of existing law prior to the appointed
day and such goods , are returned to the said place of business on or
after the appointed day, no tax shall be payable if the said goods,
after undergoing tests or any other process, are returned to such
place within six months from the appointed day :
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause
being shown, be extended by the Commissioner for a further period
not exceeding two months:

Provided further that if the said goods are not returned within the
period specified in this su b-section , the input tax credit shall be liable
to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of clause (a) of
sub-section (8) of section 142:
The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided also that the person despatching the goods may , in

accordance with the provisions of the existing law, transfer the
said goods from the said other premises on payment of tax in
India or without payment of tax for exports within the period
specified in this sub -section .
(4) The tax under sub -sectio ns (1), (2) and (3) shall not be
payable , only if the person despatching the goods and the job
worker declare the details of the inputs or goods held in stock by
the job worker on behalf of the said person on the appointed day
in such form and manner and w ithin such time as may be
prescribed .
142. (1) Where any goods on which tax, if any, had been paid under
the existing law at the time of sale thereof, not being earlier than
six months prior to the appointed day, are returned to any place
of business on or after the appointed day, the registered person
shall be eligible for refund of the tax paid under the existing law
where such goods are returned by a person, other than a
registered person, to the said place of business within a period of
six months fro m the appointed day and such goods are
identifiable to the satisfaction of the proper officer :
Miscellaneou s transitional
provisions.
Provided that if the said goods are returned by a registered
person , the return of such goods shall be deemed to be a s upply.

(2) (a) where, in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to
the appointed day, the price of any goods is revised upwards on
or after the appointed day, the registered person who had sold
such goods shall issue to the recipient a supplementa ry invoice
or debit note, containing such particulars as may be prescribed,
within thirty days of such price revision and for the purposes of
this Act , such supplementary invoice or debit note shall be
deemed to have been issued in respect of an outward su pply
made under this Act ;
(b) where, in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to
the appointed day, the price of any goods is revised downwards
on or after the appointed day, the registered person who had sold
such goods may issue to the recipi ent a credit note, containing
such particulars as may be prescribed, within thirty days of such
price revision and for the purposes of this Act such credit note
shall be deemed to have been issued in respect of an outward
supply made under this Act:

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that the registered person shall be allowed to

reduce his tax liability on account of issue of the credit note only
if the recipient of the credit note has reduced his input tax credit
corresponding to such reduction of tax liability.

(3) Every claim for refund filed by any person before , on or
after the appointed day for refund of any amount of input tax
credit, tax, interest or any other amount paid under the existing
law, shall be dispose d of in accordance with the provisions of
existing law and any amount eventually accruing to him shall be
refunded to him in cash in accordance with the provisions of the
said law :

Provided that where any claim for refund of the amount of
input tax credit is fully or partially rejected, the amount so
rejected shall lapse:

Provided further that no refund shall be allowed of any
amount of input tax credit where the balance of the said amount
as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act.

(4) Every claim for refund filed after the appointed day for
refund of any tax paid under the existing law in respect of the
goods exported before or aft er the appointed day , shall be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the existing
law:

Provided that where any claim for refund of input tax credit is
fully or partially rejected, the amount so rejected shall lapse:
Provided further that no refund shall be allowed of any
amount of input tax credit where the balance of the said amo unt
as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act .

(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
Act, any amount of input tax credit reversed prior to the
appointed day shall not be admissible as input tax credit under
this Act.
(6) (a) every proceeding of appeal, revision , review or
reference relating to a claim for input tax credit initiated whether
before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law shall
be disposed of in accordance with the prov isions of the existing
law, and any amount of credit found to be admissible to the
claimant shall be refunded to him in cash in accordance with the
provisions of the existing law, and the amount rejected, if any,
shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act :

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of

input tax credit where the balance of the said amount as on the
appointed day has been carried forward under this Act ;
(b) every proceeding of appeal, revision , review or reference
relating to recovery of input tax credit initiated whether
before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law
shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
the existing law, and if any amount of credit becomes
recoverable as a result of such appeal, revision , review or
reference, the same shall , unless r ecovered under the existing
law, be recovered as an arrear of tax under this Act and the
amount so recovered shall not be admissibl e as input tax
credit under this Act.
(7) (a) every proceeding of appeal, revision , review or
reference relating to any output tax liability initiated whether
before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law ,
shall be disposed of in acc ordance with the provisions of the
existing law, and if any amount becomes recoverable as a result
of such appeal, revision , review or reference, the same shall ,
unless r ecovered under the existing law, be recovered as an
arrear of tax under this Act and the amount so recovered shall
not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.
(b) every proceeding of appeal, revision , review or reference
relating to any output tax liability initiated whether before, on
or after the appointed day under the existing law, shall be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the existing
law, and any amount found to be admissible to the claimant
shall be refunded to him in cash in accordance with the
provisions of the existing law and the amount rejected, if
any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this
Act.
(8) (a) where in pursuance of an assessment or adjudication
proceedings instituted, whether before, on or after the appointed
day under the existing law, any amount of tax, interest, fine or
penalty becomes recoverable from the person , the same shall ,
unless r ecovered under the existing law, be recovered as an
arrear of tax under this Act and the amount so recovered shall
not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act ;

The Uttarakhan d Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(b) where in pursuance of an assessment or adjudication

proceeding s instituted, whether before, on or after the appointed
day under the existing law, any amount of tax, interest, fine or
penalty becomes refundable to the ta xable person, the same shall
be refunded to him in cash under the said law , and the amount
rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under
this Act .
(9) (a) where any return, furnished under the existing law, is
revised after the app ointed day and if, pursuant to such revision, any
amount is found to be recoverable or any amount of input tax credit
is found to be inadmissible, the same shall , unless r ecovered under
the existing law, be recovered as an arrear of tax under this Act and
the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input tax credit
under this Act ;
(b) where any return, furnished under the existing law, is revised
after the appointed day but within the time limit specified for
such revision under the existing law and i f, pursuant to such
revision, any amount is found to be refundable or input tax
credit is found to be admissible to any taxable person, the
same shall be refunded to him in cash under the existing law,
and the amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissib le as
input tax credit under this Act.
(10) Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the goods or
services or both supplied on or after the appointed day in pursuance
of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day shall be liable to
tax under the provisions of this Act.
(11) (a) notwithstanding anything contained in section 12, no tax
shall be payable on goods under this Act to the extent the tax was
leviable on the said goods under the Uttarakhand Value Added Tax
Act,2005 ;
of
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in section 13, no tax shall be
payable on services under this Act to the extent the tax was leviable
on the said services under Cha pter V of the Finance Act, 1994 ;

--- of ----
of
(c) where tax was paid on any supply , both under the Uttarakhand
Value Added Tax Act , 2005 and under Chapter V of the Finance
Act, 1994, tax shall be leviable under this Act and the taxable
person shall be entitled to take credit of value added tax or service
tax paid under the existing law to the extent of supplies made after
the appointed day and such credit shall be calculated in such
manner as may be prescribed.
The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(12) Where any goods sent on approval basis, not earlier than

six months be fore the appointed day, are rejected or not
approved by the buyer and returned to the seller on or after the
appointed day, no tax shall be payable thereon if such goods are
returned within six months from the appointed day:
Provided that the s aid period of six months may, on
sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the Commissioner
for a further period not exceeding two months:
Provided further that the tax shall be payable by the person
returning the goods if such goods are liab le to tax under this Act,
and are returned after the period specified in this sub -section :
Provided also that tax shall be payable by the person who
has sent the goods on approval basis if such goods are liable to
tax under this Act, and are not returned within the period
specified in this sub -section .
(13) Where a supplier has made any sale of goods in respect of
which tax was required to be deducted at source under the
Uttarakhand Value Added Tax, 2005 and has also issued an
invoice for the same before the appointed day, no deduction of
tax at source under section 51 shall be made by the deductor
under the said section where payment to the said supplier is
made on or after the appointed day.
(14) Where any goods or capital goods belonging to the
principal are lying at the premises of the agent on the appointed
day, the agent shall be entitled to take credit of the tax paid on
such goods or capital goods subject to fulfilment of the
following conditions :
(i) the agent is a registered taxable pe rson under this Act;
(ii) both the principal and the agent declare the details of stock
of goods or capital goods lying with such agent on the day
immediately preceding the appointed day in such form and
manner and within such time as may be prescribed in this
behalf;
(iii) the invoices for such goods or capital goods had been issued
not earlier than twelve months immediately preceding the
appointed day; and
(iv) the principal has either reversed or not availed of the input
tax credit in respect of such, -

The Uttarakh and Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(a) goods; or

(b) capital goods or, having availed of such credit, has
reversed the said credit, to the extent availed of by
him.
Explanation .- For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression
“capital goods” shall have the s ame meaning as assigned to it in
the Uttarakhand Value Added Tax, 2005 .

CHAPTER XXI
MISCELLANEOUS

143. (1) A registered person (hereafter in this section refe rred to as the
“principal”) may, under intimation and subject to such conditions as
may b e prescribed, send any inputs or capital goods, without payment
of tax, to a job worker for job work and from there subsequently send
to another job worker and likewise, and shall, –– Job work
procedure.
(a) bring back inputs, after completion of job work or
otherwise, or capital goods, other than moulds and dies, jigs and
fixtures, or tools, within one year and three years, respectively, of
their being sent out, to any of his place of business, without
payment of tax;
(b) supply such inputs, after co mpletion of job work or
otherwise, or capital goods, other than moulds and dies, jigs and
fixtures, or tools, within one year and three years, respectively, of
their being sent out from the place of business of a job worker on
payment of tax within India, or with or without payment of tax for
export, as the case may be:
Provided that the principal shall not supply the goods from the
place of business of a job worker in accordance with the provisions
of this clause unless the said principal declares the place of
business of the job worker as his additional place of business
except in a case -
[“Provided further that the period of one year and three year
may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the
commissioner for a further not exceeding one year and years
respectively.”]
(i) where the job worker is registered under section 25; or
(ii) where the principal is engaged in the supply of such
goods as may be notified by the Commissioner.
-------------------------------
1. Inserted by secti on 28 of Uttrakhand Act no. 31 of 2018

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) The responsibility for keeping proper accounts for the

inputs or capital goods shall lie with the principal.

(3) Where the inputs sent for job work are n ot received back
by the principal after completion of job work or otherwise in
accordance with the provisions of clause (a) of sub -section ( 1) or
are not supplied from the place of business of the job worker in
accordance with the provisions of clause (b) of sub -section ( 1)
within a period of one year of their being sent out, it shall be
deemed that such inputs had been supplied by the principal to
the job worker on the day when the said inputs were sent out.

(4) Where the capital goods, other than moul ds and dies, jigs
and fixtures, or tools, sent for job work are not received back by
the principal in accordance with the provisions of clause (a) of
sub-section ( 1) or are not supplied from the place of business of
the job worker in accordance with the pr ovisions of clause (b) of
sub-section ( 1) within a period of three years of their being sent
out, it shall be deemed that such capital goods had been supplied
by the principal to the job worker on the day when the said
capital goods were sent out.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1)
and ( 2), any waste and scrap generated during the job work may
be supplied by the job worker directly from his place of business
on payment of tax, if such job worker is registered, or by the
princi pal, if the job worker is not registered.

Explanation . - For the purpose s of job work, input includes
intermediate goods arising from any treatment or process carried out
on the inputs by the principal or the job worker.
144. Where any document -
(i) is produced by any person under this Act or any other law
for the time being in force; or

(ii) has been seized from the custody or control of any person
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force; or

(iii) has been received from any pl ace outside India in the
course of any proceeding s under this Act or any other law for
the time being in force, Presumption
as to
documents in
certain cases .
and such document is tendered by the prosecution in evidence against
him or any other person who is tried jointly with him, the court
shall --

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(a) unless the contrary is proved by such person, presume —
(i) the truth of the contents of such document;
(ii) that the signature and every other part of such d ocument
which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular
person or which the court may reasonably assume to have
been signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular
person, is in that person’s handwriting, and in the case of a
document executed or attested, that it was executed or attested
by the person by whom it purports to have been so executed
or attested;
(b) admit the document in evidence notwithstanding that it is not
duly stamped, if such document is otherwise admissible in
eviden ce.
145. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, —

(a) a micro film of a document or the reproduction of the
image or images embodied in such micro film (whether enlarged
or not); or

(b) a facsimile copy of a document; or

(c) a statement contained in a document and included in a
printed materi al produced by a computer , subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed; or

(d) any information stored electronically in any device or
media, including any hard copies made of such information,
Admissibility
of micro films,
facsimile
copies of
documents and
computer
printouts as
documents and
as evidence.
shall be deemed to be a document for the purposes of this Act and the
rules made thereunder and shall be ad missible in any
proceedings thereunder, without further proof or production of the
original, as evidence of any contents of the original or of any fact
stated therein of which direct evidence would be admissible.

(2) In any proceedings under this Act and or the rules
made thereunder , where it is desired to give a statement in
evidence by virtue of this section, a certificate,

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(a) identifying the document containing the statement and

describing the man ner in which it was produced;

(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the
production of that document as may be appropriate for the
purpose of showing that the docu ment was produced by a
computer,

shall be evidence of any matter state d in the certificate and for the
purposes of this sub -section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be
stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating
it.

146. The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
notify the C ommon Goods and Services Tax Electronic Portal for
facilitating registration, payment of tax, furnishing of returns,
computation and settlement of integrated tax, electronic way bill
and for carrying out such other functions and for such p urposes as
may be prescribed.
Common Portal .
147. The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
notify certain supplies of goods as “deemed exports”, where goods
supplied do not leave India, and payment for such supplies is
received either in Indian rupees o r in convertible foreign exchange,
if such goods are manufactured in India.
Deemed Exports .
148. The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, and
subject to such conditions and safeguards as may be prescribed,
notify certain classes of registered persons, and the special
procedures to be followed by such persons including those with
regard to registration, furnishing of return, payment of tax and
administration of such persons .
Special
procedure for
certain
processes.
149. (1) Every regis tered person may be assigned a g oods and services
tax compliance rating score by the Government b ased on his record
of compliance with the provisions of this Act.
Goods and
services tax
compliance
rating.
(2) The g oods and services tax compliance rating score may
be determined on the basis of such parameters as may be
prescribed.
(3) The g oods and services tax compliance rating score may
be updated at periodic intervals and intimated to the
registered person and also placed in the public domain in suc h
manner as may be prescribed.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

150. (1) Any person, being —
(a) a taxable person; or
(b) a local authority or other public body or association;
or
(c) any authority of the State Government responsible for
the collection of value added tax or sales tax or State excise
duty or an authority of the Central Government res ponsible
for the collection of excise duty or c ustoms duty; or Obligation to
furnish information
return.
of
1961. (d) an income tax author ity appointed under the
provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961; or
of
1934. (e) a banking company within the meaning of clause ( a)
of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; or

of
2003. (f) a State Electricity Board or an electricity distribution
or transmission licensee under the Electricity Act, 2003, or
any other entity entrusted with such functions by the Central
Government or the State Government; or

of
1908. (g) the Registrar or Sub -Registrar appointed under section
of th e Registration Act, 1908; or

of
2013. (h) a Registrar within the meaning of the Companies Act,
2013; or

of
1988. (i) the registering authority empowered to register motor
vehicles under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; or

of
2013. (j) the Co llector referred to in clause ( c) of section 3 of
the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013; or

of
1956. (k) the recognised stock exchange referred to in clause ( f)
of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,
1956; or

of
1996. (l) a depository referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1)
of section 2 of the Depositories Act, 1996; or

of
1934. (m) an officer of the Reserve Bank of India as constituted
under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; or

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

of
2013. (n) the Goods and Services Tax Network, a company registered
under the Companies Act, 2013; or

(o) a person to whom a Unique Identi ty Number has been granted
under sub -section (9 ) of section 25; or

(p) any other person as may be specified, on the recommendations
of the Council, by the Government,
who is responsible for maintaining record of registration or
statement of accounts or any periodic return or document containing
details of payment of tax and other details of transaction of goods or
services or both or transactions related to a bank account or consumption
of electricity or transaction of purchase, sale or exchange of good s or
property or right or interest in a property under any law for the time
being in force, shall furnish an information return of the same in respect
of such periods, within such time, in such form and manner and to such
authority or agency as may be pres cribed.
(2) Where the Commissioner, or an officer authorised by him in
this behalf, considers that the information furnished in the
information return is defective, he may intimate the defect to the
person who has furnished such information return and g ive him an
opportunity of rectifying the defect within a period of thirty days
from the date of such intimation or within such further period
which, on an application made in this behalf, the said authority
may allow and if the defect is not rectified with in th e said period of
thirty days or , the further period so allowed, then, notwithstanding
anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, such
information return shall be treated as not furnished and the
provisions of this Act shall apply.
(3) Where a person who is required to furnish information return
has not furnished the same within the time specified in sub -section
(1) or sub -section ( 2), the said authority may serve upon him a
notice requiring furnishing of such information return within a
period not exceeding ninety days from the date of service of the
notice and such person shall furnish the information return.
151. [ The Commissioner or an officer aothorised by him may, by an order,
direct any person to furnish information relating to any matter dealt with
in connection with this Act, within such time, in such form, and in such
manner, as may be specified therein.] Power to
call for
information

--------------------------------------------------------------

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

152. [(1) No information with respect to any matter given for the
purposes of section 150 or section 151 shall, without the previous
consent in writing of the concerned person or his authorised
representative, be published in such manner so as to enable such
particulars to be identified as referring to a particular person and no
such information shall be used for the purpose of any proceedings
under this Act without giving an oppor tunity of being heard to the
person concerned .] Bar on
disclosure of
information.
(2) [***] .
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the publication of
any information relating to a class of taxable persons or class
of transactions, if in the opi nion of the Commissioner , it is
desirable in the public interest to publish such information.
153. Any officer not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner may,
having regard to the nature and complexity of the case and the
interest of revenue, take assi stance of any expert at any stage of
scrutiny, inquiry, investigation or any other proceedings before
him. Taking
assistance from
an expert.
154. The Commissioner or an officer authorise d by him may take
samples of goods from the possession of any taxab le person, where
he considers it necessary, and provide a receipt for any samples so
taken. Power to take
samples .
155. Where any person claims that he is eligible for input tax credit
under this Act, the burden of proving such claim shall lie on such
person. Burden of Proof.
156.
of
1860. All persons discharging functions under this Act shall be deemed to
be public servants within the meaning of sect ion 21 of the Indian
Penal Code . Persons deemed
to be public
servants.

157. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against
the President, State President, Members, officers or other
employees of the Appellate Tribunal or any other person authorised
by the said Appellate Tribunal for anything which is in good faith
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made
thereunder. Protection of
action taken
under this Act.

-------------------------------------------------------
2- Omitted by section 14(b) of UK Act no 22 of 2021.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie
against any officer appointed or authorised u nder this Act for
anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith
under thi s Act or the rules made thereunder.
158. (1) All particulars contained in any statement made, return
furnished or accounts or documents produced in accordance with
this Act, or in any record of evidence given in the course of any
proceedings under this A ct (other than proceedings before a
criminal court), or in any record of any proceedings under this Act
shall, save as provided in sub -section (3), not be disclosed. Disclosure of
information by a
public servant .

of
1872. (2) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872, no court shall , save as otherwise
provided in sub -section (3), require any officer appointed or
authorised u nder this Act to produce before it or to give
evidence before it in respect of particulars referred to in subsection (1).
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the
disclosure of, ––
of
1860.
of
1988. (a) any particulars in respect of any statement, return,
accounts, documents, evidence, affidavit or deposition, for the
purpose of an y prosecution under the Indian Penal Code or the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, or any other law for the
time being in force; or
(b) any particulars to the Central Government or the State
Government or to any person acting in the implementation of
this Act, for the purpose s of carrying out the object s of this Act;
or
(c) any particulars when such disclosure is occasioned by the
lawful exercise under this Act of any process for the serv ice of
any notice or recovery of any demand; or
(d) any par ticulars to a civil court in any suit or proceeding s,
to which the Government or any authority under this Act is a
party, which relates to any matter arising out of any proceeding s
under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force
authorisi ng any such authority to exercise any powers
thereunder; or
(e) any particulars to any officer appointed for the purpose of
audit of tax receipts or refunds of the tax imposed by this Act; or

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(f) any particulars where such particulars are relevant for the
purposes of any inquiry into the conduct of any officer appointed or
authorised under this Act, to any person or persons appointed as an
inquiry officer under any law for the time being in force; or

(g) any such particulars to an officer of the Central Government
or of any State Government, as may be necessary for the purpose of
enabling that Government to levy or realise any tax or duty; or

(h) any particulars when such disclosure is occas ioned by the
lawful exercise by a public servant or any other statutory authority,
of his or its powers under any law for the time being in force; or

(i) any particulars relevant to any inquiry into a charge of
misconduct in connection with any proceed ings under this Act
against a practising advocate, a tax practitioner, a practising cost
accountant, a practising chartered accountant, a practising company
secretary to the authority empowered to take disciplinary action
against the members practising the profession of a legal practitioner,
a cost accountant, a chartered accountant or a company secretary, as
the case may be; or

(j) any particulars to any agency appointed for the purposes of
data entry on any automated system or for the purpose of opera ting,
upgrading or maintaining any automated system where such agency
is contractually bound not to use or disclose such particulars except
for the aforesaid purposes; or

(k) any such particulars to an officer of the Government as may
be necessary for the purposes of any other law for the time being in
force; and

(l) any information relating to any class of taxable persons or
class of transactions for publication, if, in the opinion of the
Commissioner, it is desirable in the public interest, to pub lish such
information.

159. (1) If the Commissione r, or any other officer authoris ed by him in this
behalf, is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public
interest to publish the name of any person and any other particulars
relating t o any proceedings or prosecution under this Act in respect of
such person, it may cause to be published such name and particulars in
such manner as it thinks fit.
Publication
of
information
in respect of
persons in
certain cases.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(2) No publication under this section shall be made in relation
to any penalty imposed under this Act until the time for
presenting an appeal to the Appellate Authority under section
has expired without an appeal having bee n presented or the
appeal, if presented, has been disposed of.
Explanation .––In the case of firm, company or other association
of persons, the names of the partners of the firm, directors, managing
agents, secretaries and treasurers or managers of the c ompany, or the
members of the association, as the case may be, may also be
published if, in the opinion of the Commissione r, or any other officer
authoris ed by him in this behalf, circumstances of the case justify it.
160. (1) No assessment, re -assessmen t, adjudication, review, revision,
appeal, rectification, notice, summons or other proceedings done,
accepted, made, issued, initiated, or purported to have been done,
accepted, made, issued, initiated in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act shal l be invalid or deemed to be invalid merely
by reason of any mistake, defect or omission therein, if such
assessment, re -assessment, adjudication, review, revision, appeal,
rectification, notice, summons or other proceedings are in substance
and effect in conformity with or according to the intents, purposes
and requirements of this Act or any existing law. Assessment
proceedings,
etc. not to be
invalid on
certain
grounds.
(2) The service of any notice, order or communication shall
not be called in ques tion, if the notice, order or communication,
as the case may be, has already been acted upon by the person
to whom it is issued or where such service has not been called
in question at or in the earlier proceedings commenced,
continued or finalised pursuan t to such notice, order or
communication.
161. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 160, and
notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this
Act, any authority, who has passed or issued any decision or order or
notice or cer tificate or any other document, may rectify any error
which is apparent on the face of record in such decision or order or
notice or certificate or any other document, either on its own motion
or where such error is brought to its notice by any officer app ointed
under this Act or an officer appointed under the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act or by the affected person within a period of three
months from the date of issue of such decision or order or notice or
certificate or any other document, as the cas e may be: Rectification
of errors
apparent on the
face of record.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that no such rectification shall be done after a period
of six months from the date of issue of such decision or order or

notice or certificate or any other document:

Provided further that the said period of six months shall not
apply in such cases where the rectification is purely in the nature of
correction of a clerical or arithmetical error, arising from any
accidental slip or omission:

Provided also that where such rectification adversely affects any
person , the principles of natural justice shall be followed by the
authority carrying out such rectification.

162. Save as provided in section s 117 and 118, no civil court shall have
jurisdiction to deal with or decide any question arising from or
relating to anything done or purported to be done under this Act.
Bar on
jurisdiction of
civil courts.
163. Wherever a copy of any order or document is to be p rovided to any
person on an application made by him for that purpose, there shall be
paid such fee as may be prescribed.
Levy of fee.
164. (1) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Counc il,
by notification, make rules for carrying out the pro visions of this Act.
Power of
Government to
make rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of
sub-section (1), the Government may make rules for all or any
of the matters which by this Act are required to be, or may be,
prescribed or in respect of which provisions are t o be or may be
made by rules.

(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall
include the power to give retrospective effect to the rules or any
of them from a date not earlier than the date on which the
provisions of this Act come into force.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(4) Any rules made under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) may

provide that a contravention thereof shall be liable to a penalty
not exceeding ten thousand rupees.

165. The Government may, by notification, make regulations consistent
with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry o ut the
provisions of this Act.
Power to make
regulations.
166. Every rule made by the Government, every r egulation made by the
Government and every notification issued by the Government under
this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued,
before the State Legislature , while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, the State Legislature agrees in making any modification
in the rule or regu lation or in the notification, as the case may be, or
the State Legislature agrees that the rule or regulation or the
notification should not be made, the rule or regulation or
notification, as the case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in
such mod ified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule
or regulation or notification, as the case may be.
Laying of
rules,
regulations and
notifications.
167. The Commissioner may, by notification, direct that subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, any power
exercisable by any authority or officer under this Act may be
exercisable al so by another authority or officer as may be specified
in such notification.
Delegation of
powers .

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

168.

[168A. (1) The Commissioner may, if he considers it necessary or expedient
so to do for the purpose of uniformity in the implementation of this
Act, issue such orders, instructions or directions to the State tax
officers as it may deem fit, and thereupon all such officers and all
other persons employed in the implementation of thi s Act shall
observe and follow such orders, instructions or directions.

(2) [****]

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the
Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by
notification, extend the time limit specified in, or prescribed or
notified under, this Act in respect of actions which cannot be
completed or complied with due to force majeure .
(2) The power to issue notification under sub -section (1) shall
include the power to give retrospective effect to such notifi cation
from such date not earlier than the date of commencement of this
Act.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this section, the expression
"force majeure ” means a case of war, epidemic, flood, drought, fire,
cyclone, earthquake or any other calamity cause d by nature or
otherwise affecting the implementation of an y of the provisions of
this Act.]
Power to issue
instructions or
directions.
169. (1) Any decision, order, summons, notice or other communication
under this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be served by any
one of the following methods, namely: --
Service of
notice in
certain
circumstances.

------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Omit ted by section 12 of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.
2. inserted by section 13 of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(a) by giving or tendering it directly or by a messenger
including a courier to the addressee or the taxable pers on or to his
manager or authoris ed representative or an advocate or a tax
practitioner holding authority to appear in the proceedings on
behalf of the taxable person or to a person regularly employed by
him in connection with the business, or to any adult member of
family residing with the taxable person; or

(b) by registered post or speed post or courier with
acknowledgement due, to the person for whom it is intended or his
authorised representative, if any , at his last known place of
business or residence; or

(c) by sending a communication to his e -mail address
provided at the time of registration or as amended from time to
time; or

(d) by making it available on the common portal; or

(e) by publication in a newspaper circulating in the locality in
which the taxable person or the person to whom it is iss ued is last
known to have resided, carried on business or personally worked
for gain; or

(f) if none of the modes aforesaid is practicable, by affixing it
in some conspicuous place at his last known place of business or
residence and if such mode is no t practicable for any reason, then
by affixing a copy thereof on the notice board of the office of the
concerned officer or authority who or which passed such decision
or order or issued such summons or notice.

(2) Every decision, order, summons, notic e or any
communication shall be deemed to have been served on the
date on which it is tendered or published or a copy thereof is
affixed in the manner provided in sub -section (1).

(3) When such decision, order, summons, notice or any
communication is sent by registered post or speed post, it shall
be deemed to have been received by the addressee at the expiry
of the period normally taken by such post in transit unless the
contrary is proved.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

170. The amount of tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum payable,
and the amount of refund or any other sum due, under the provisions
of this Act shall be rounded off to the nearest rupee and, for this
purpose, where such amount contains a part of a rup ee consisting of
paise, then, if such part is fifty paise or more, it shall be increased to
one rupee and if such part is less than fifty paise it shall be ignored. Rounding off
of tax etc.
171. (1) Any reduction in rate of tax on any supply of goods or services or
the benefit of input tax credit shall be passed on to the recipient by
way of commensurate reduction in prices . Antiprofiteering
Measure.
(2) The Central Government may , on recommendations of the
Council, by notification, constitute an Autho rity, or empower
an existing Authority constituted under any law for the time
being in force, to examine whether input tax credits availed by
any registered person or the reduction in the tax rate have
actually resulted in a commensurate reduction in the p rice of
the goods or services or both supplied by him.
(3) The Authority referred to in sub -section (2) shall exercise
such powers and discharge such functions as may be
prescribed.
[(3A) Where the Authority referred to in sub -section (2), after
holding examination as required under the said sub -section comes to
the conclusion that any registered person has profiteered under sub section (1), such person shall be liable to pay li able to pay penalty
equivalent to ten per cent. of the amount so profite ered.

Provided that no penalty shall be leviable if the profiteered
amount is deposited within thirty days of the date of passing of the
order by the Authority.
Explanation - For the purposes of this section, the expression
“profiteered” shall mean the a mount determined on account of not
passing the ben efit of reduction in rate of tax on supply of goods or
services or both or the benefit of input tax credit to the recipient by
way of commensurate reduction in the price of the goods or services
or both. ]
172. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provisions of this
Act, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
by a general or a special order published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions not inconsistent with t he provisions of this Act
or the rules or regulations made thereunder, as may be necessary or
expedient for the purpose of removing the said difficulty: Removal of
difficulties.
-------------- -------------------------------- ---
1. inserted by section 23 of Uk.Act no 13 of 20 19.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a
period of [five years ] from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section sha ll be laid, as soon
as may be, after it is made, before the State Legislature .
173.

Act no 2
of 1959

Act no 8
of 1975 Save as otherwise provided in this Act, on and from the date of
commencement of this Act, -

(i) in The Uttarakhand (The Uttar Prade sh Municipal Corporation
Act, 1959) Adaptation and Modification Order, 2002 , Section
and sub -section 2 (h) of Section 172 shall be omitted;

(ii) in The Uttarakhand (Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land
Revenue Laws Act, 1975) Adaptation and Modification order,
Chapter -II (Section 2 to 13) shall be omitted; Amendment of
certain Acts .
174.

Act no 27
of 2005

Act no 23
of 2015

Act no 13
of 2008

of 1979

U P Act
no. 16 of
(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, on and from the date of
commencement of this Act,

(i) The Uttarakhand Value Added Tax Act, 2005 , except in respect of
goods included in the Entry 54 of the State List of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution,

(ii) The Uttarakhand Cess Act, 2015, except in respect o f goods
included in the Entry 54 of the State List of the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution,
(iii) The Uttar akhand Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas
Act, 2008,
(iv) The Uttar Pradesh Entertainment and Betting Tax Act, 1979,
(as applicable to the State of U ttarakhand)
(v) The Uttar Pradesh Advertisements Tax Act, 1981 (as
applicable to the State of Uttarakhand)
(hereafter referred to as the repealed Acts) are hereby repealed.
(2) The repeal of the said Acts and the amendment of the Acts
specified in section 17 3 (hereafter referred to as “such
amendment” or “amended Act”, as the case may be) to the extent
mentioned in sub -section (1) or section 173 shall not —
(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time of such
amendment or repeal; or Repeal and
saving.
-------------- -------------- --------
1- Substituted by section 14 of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(b) affect the previous operation of the amended Acts or
repealed Acts and orders or anything duly done or suffered
thereunder; or

(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation, or liability acquired,
accrued or incurred under the amended Acts or repealed Acts or
orders under such repealed or amended Acts:

Provided that any tax exemption granted as an incen tive
against investment through a notification shall not continue as
privilege if the said notification is rescinded on or after the
appointed day; or

(d) affect any tax, surcharge, penalty, fine, interest as are due
or may become due or any forfeiture or punishment incurred or
inflicted in respect of any offence or violation committed against
the provisions of the amended Acts or repealed Acts; or

Act 1 of
. (e) affect any investigation, inquiry, verification (including
scruti ny and audit), assessment proceedings, adjudication and any
other legal proceedings or recovery of arrears or remedy in respect
of any such tax, surcharge, penalty, fine, interest, right, privilege,
obligation, liability, forfeiture or punishment, as afor esaid, and
any such investigation, inquiry, verification (including scrutiny
and audit), assessment proceedings, adjudication and other legal
proceedings or recovery of arrears or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced, and any such tax, surcharge , penalty, fine,
interest, forfeiture or punishment may be levied or imposed as if
these Acts had not been so amended or repealed; or
(f) affect any proceedings including that relating to an
appeal, revision, review or reference, instituted before , on or
after the appointed day under the said amended Acts or
repealed Acts and such proceedings shall be continued under
the said amended Acts or repealed Acts as if this Act had not
come into force and the said Acts had not been amended or
repealed .
(3) The ment ion of the particular matters referred to in section
and sub -section (1) shall not be held to prejudice or
affect the general application of section 6 of the U P
General Clauses Act, 1904, (U P Act no 1 of 1904), (as
applicable to The State of Uttarakh and) with regard to the
effect of repeal .

---

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

SCHEDULE I
[See section 7]

ACTIVITIES TO BE TREATED AS SUPPLY EVEN IF MADE
WITHOUT CONSIDERATION

1. Permanent transfer or disposal of business as sets where
input tax credit has been availed on such assets.
2. Supply of goods or services or both between related persons
or between distinct persons as specified in section 25, when made in
the co urse or furtherance of business:
Provided that gifts no t exceeding fifty thousand rupees in
value in a financial year by an employer to an employee shall not be
treated as supply of goods or services or both .
3. Supply of goods —
(a) by a principal to his agent where the agent undertakes to
supply such goods on behalf of the principal; or
(b) by an agent to his principal where the agent undertakes to
receive such goods on behalf of the principal.
4. Import of services by [person] from a related person or
from any of his other establishments outside India, i n the course or
furtherance of business.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

SCHEDULE II
[See section 7]
ACTIVITIES[OR TRANSACTIONS] TO BE TREATED AS
SUPPLY OF GOODS OR SUPPLY OF SERVICES

1. Transfer
(a) any transfer of the title in goods is a supply of goods;
(b) any transfer of right in goods or of undivided share in goods
without the transfer of title thereof, is a supply of services;
(c) any transfer of title in goods under an agreement which
stipulates that property in goods shall pass at a future date upon
payment of full consideration as agreed, is a supply of goods.

2. Land and Building
(a) any lease, tenancy, easement, licence to occupy land is a supply
of services;
(b) any lease or letting out of the building including a commercial,
industrial or residential complex for business or commerce, either
wholly or partly, is a supply of services.
3. Treatment or process
Any treatment or process which is applied to another person’s
goods is a supply of service s.
4. Transfer of business assets
(a) where goods forming part of the assets of a business are
transferred or disposed of by or under the directions of the person
carrying on the business so as no longer to form part of those
assets, [****] , such transfer or disposal is a supply of goods by
the person;

(b) where, by or under the direction of a person carrying on a
business, goods held or used for the purposes of the business are
put to any private use or are used, or made available to any person
for use, for any purpose other than a purpose of the business,
[****], the usage or making available of such goods is a supply of
services;
-----------------------------
2. inserted. by schedule 2 of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
3. omitted by section 15 (a) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.
4. Omitted by section 15 (b) of Uk.Act no 25 of 2020.

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

of 1972

(c) where any p erson ceases to be a taxable person, any goods forming part
of the assets of any business carried on by him shall be deemed to be supplied by
him in the course or furtherance of his business immediately before he ceases to
be a taxable person, unless —
(i) the business is transferred as a going concern to another person; or
(ii) the business is carried on by a personal representative who is deemed to
be a taxable person
5. Supply of services
The following shall be treated as supply of service, namely: --
(a) ren ting of immovable property;
(b) construction of a complex, building, civil structure or a part thereof,
including a complex or building intended for sale to a buyer, wholly or partly,
except where the entire consideration has been received after issuance o f
completion certificate, where required, by the competent authority or after its first
occupation, whichever is earlier.
Explanation .––For the purposes of this clause ––
(1) the expression "competent authority" means the Government or any
authority authori sed to issue completion certificate under any law for the time
being in force and in case of non -requirement of such certificate from such
authority, from any of the following, namely: –
(i) an architect registered with the Council of Architecture constitut ed under
the Architects Act, 1972; or
(ii) a chartered engineer registered with the Institution of Engineers (India);
or
(iii) a licensed surveyor of the respective local body of the city or town or
village or development or planning authority;
(2) the exp ression "construction" includes additions, alterations,
replacements or remodeling of any existing civil structure ;
(c) temporary transfer or permitting the use or enjoyment of any intellectual
property right;
(d)development, design, programming, customisa tion, adaptation,
upgradation, enhancement, implementation of information technology software;

The Uttarakhand Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017

(e) agreeing to the obligation to refrain from an act, or to tolerate

an act or a situation, or to do a n act; and
(f) transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether
or not for a specified period) for cash, deferred payment o r other
valuable consideration.
6. Composite supply
The following composite supplies shall be treated as a supply of
services , namely :—
(a) works contract as defined in clause (119) of section 2 ; and
(b) supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other
manner whatsoever, of goods, being food or any other article for
human consumption or any drink (other than al coholic liquor for
human consumption), where such supply or service is for cash,
deferred payment or other valuable consideration.
7. [***]

-------------------------------------------
1- Omitted by section 15 of UK Act no. 22 of 2021.

SCHEDULE III
[See s ection 7]

ACTIVITIES OR TRANSACTIONS WHICH SHALL BE TREATED
NEITHER AS A SUPPLY OF GOODS NOR A SUPPLY OF SERVICES
1. Services by an employee to the employer in the course of or in
relation to his employment.
2. Services by a ny court or Tribunal established under any law for
the time being in force.

3.(a) the functions performed by the Members of Parliament,
Members of State Legislature, Members of Panchayats, Members of
Municipalities and Members of other local author ities;
(b) the duties performed by any person who holds any post in
pursuance of the provisions of the Constitution in that capacity; or
(c) the duties performed by any person as a Chairperson or a Member
or a Director in a body established by the Centr al Government or a
State Government or local authority and who is not deemed as an
employee before the commencement of this clause.
4. Services of funeral, burial, crematorium or mortuary including
transportation of the deceased.
5. Sale of land an d, subject to clause (b) of paragraph 5 of Schedule
II, sale of building.
Actionable claims, other than lottery, betting and gambling.
[7.Supply of goods from a place outside India to another place
outside India without such goods entering into India.
8(a) Supply of warehoused goods to any person before
clearance for home consumption;
(b) Supply of goods by the consignee to any other person, by
endorsement of document of little to the goods, after the goods
have been dispatched from the port of origin loc ated outside India
but before clearance for home consumption”]
Explanation 1.––For the purposes of paragraph 2 , the term “court”
includes District Court, High Court and Supreme Court.

[“Explanation -2: For the purposes of paragraph 8, the expression
“ware housed goods” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
the customs Act, 1962.”]
-----------------------------------------
1. inserted. by schedule 3(i) of Uttrakhand. Act no. 31 of 2018.
2. inserted. by schedule 3(ii) of Uttrakhand. Act n o. 31 of 2018.