An
Act
to consolidate the connected matters of Gram P anchayat, Kshet tra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat and to provide the incidental matters thereof .
IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Sixty seventh year of the Republic of India by Utt arakhand
State Legislative Assembly as follows: -
Part - I
Chapter - I
Preliminary
Short Title , extent
and
commencement
(1) This Act may be called the Uttarakhand Panchayati Raj Act,
2016.
(2) It shall extent to the whole of Utt arakhand except any area
included under the U.P. Nagar Mahapalika Adhiniyam, 1959,
U.P. Municipalit ies Act, 1916 and the Cantonment Board Act,
or any area included in the Corresponding Act's.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Definitions 2 In this Act , unless the context otherwise requires : -
(1) "adult" means a person who has attained the age of eighteen
years ;
(2) "Gram Sabha " means a body established under section 3(a), and
consisting of persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to
a village comprised within the area of a Gram Panchayat;
(3) "rural area" means the village as mentioned in the records
relating to the revenue except the Urba n body areas and
cantonment area s of all lev els in the district and it includes a
village declared by general or special order for the purposes of
this Act by the State Government ;
(4) "Gram Panchayat" means the Gram Panchayat established under
(5) “Kshettra Panchayat" means any Kshettra Panchayat and shall
include any committee, member, officer or servant of the
Kshettra Panchayat authorised or required under this Act to
exercise any power s or perform any duty or function of the
Kshettra Panchayat under this Act;

(6) “Khand” means any development Khand ;
(7) "house" includes any shop, warehouse, shed and any enclosure
used for keeping carts or cattle ;
(8) "Zila Panchaya t" means Zila Panchayat incorporated under this
Act and shall include any committee and any member, officer or
servant of the Zila Panchayat, authorised or required under this
Act to exercise any power s or perform any duty or function of
the Zila Panchaya t under this Act ;
(9) “Backward Classes” means the reservat ion rules for the Other
Backward Classes in the Uttrakhand as provisions specified for
this purpose by the State Government ;
(10) “Scheduled Castes” means the castes deemed to be Scheduled
Caste s for the purposes of the Constitution of India;
(11) “Scheduled Tribes” means the Tribes deemed to be Scheduled
Tribes for the purposes of the Constitution of India;
(12) “Schedule Bank” shall have the meaning assigned to the
expression in the Reserve ban k of India Act, 1934;
(13) “town area" shall have the meaning assigned to it under the
Municipalities Act . In this area, the area falling un der the bodies
of all levels of the town bodies shall be included in the town
area;
(14) "cantonment" and "cantonme nt board" shall have the same
meanings assigned to them under the Cantonments Act, 1924 ;
(15) “ Land Management Committee ” means a Land Management
Committee of Gram Panchayat fo r the purpose of this Act;
1{(16) “Panchayat“ means Gram Panchayat, Kshet tra Panchayat and
Zila Panchayat respectively in relation to Part II, Part III and
Part IV under this Act ;}
(17) “Wards election areas of the Panchayat ” means ward election
area of Gram Panchayat in context of Kshettra Panchayat ward
election area of any Kshettra Panchayat and in context of Zila
Panchayat ward e lection area of any Zila Panchayat ;
(18) “Chairman and Vice chairman in the context of Concerning
Panchayat as Gram Panchayat , Ksh ettra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat ” means the Pradhan or Up Pradh an or Pramukh or
Up Pramukh and Chairman and Vice chairman of these
institutions respectively;
(19) “Panchayat Employee ” means such persons who is employed
and in - service in the three tiers Panchayat institutions whether
he is getting pay from the Fund of the State Government;
------------------------------------------------------

(20) "Collector" or "District Magistrate" or "Sub -Divisional
Magistrate", in relation to the Panchayat means the Col lector,
District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate of the district
or the sub -division, as the case may be, in which such
Panchayat is constituted and shall respectively include
Additional Collector, Additional District Magistrate and
Additional Sub -Divisional Magistrate;
(21) "District M agistrate" means the district magistrate appointed
under section 20 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(22) "District Level Officer " means such officers of the district as
the State Government may from time to t ime specify as such
by notification in the Gazette;
(23) “State Election Commission” means the State Elec tion
Commission referred to in a rticle 243 -K of the Constitution of
India ;
(24) “Electoral Registration Officer” means such an officer who is
designate d or nominated as such by the State Election
Commission in consultation with the State Government for preparing
and revising the electoral rolls in any district.
(25) “Assistant Electoral Registration Officer” means such person
who is appointed as such by the Electoral Registration Officer
for one or more Panchayat areas;
(26) “Finance Commission” means the Financ e Commission
constituted under a rticle 243 -I of the Constitution;
1{(27) “State Election Commissioner” means an officer of the State
Government designated as such by the Governor ;}
(28) "Judge" means the District Judge and, includes any other
subordinate civil judicial officer named or designated by the
District Judge in this behalf;
(29) "Division", "'district" and "te hsil" shall have the same m eanings
as they have in the Land Revenue Act, 1901 , division, district
and tehsil respectively ;
(30) "Commissioner " means the commissioner appointed under
for the division within which the Kshettr a Panchayat or the
Zila Panchayats as the case may be exercises its jurisdiction
and includes an additional commissioner appointed under this
Act for such division;
------------------------------------------------------

(31) "Population" means the population as ascertained at the last
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published;
(32) "Quarter" means a period of three months commencing on the
first day of any of the mo nths of January, April, July and
October;
(33) "Prescribed" means prescribed by th is Act or by any rule made
thereunder;
(34) "Prescribed A uthority" means any person or authority n otified
by the State Government in the Gazette as, prescribed authority
for any purpose under this Act;
1{(35) “Rules” means rules made under this Act but until such rules
are not promulgated rules means rules promulgated under the
Uttar Pradesh Panchayati Raj Act, 1947 and the Uttar Pradesh
Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat A ct, 1961 ;}
(36) "By e-laws" means a by e-laws made by the State Government in
exercise of a power s conferred by this Act ;
(37) "Regulations" means a regulations made by the State
Government in exercise of a power s conferred by this Act;
(38) "State” means t he State of Uttarakhand;
(39) “State Government” means the Government of Uttarakhand;
(40) “ Electoral R olls of Legislative Assembly ” means such electoral
rolls or any election area of th e State Legislative Assembly
which is prepared according or under th e provisions of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951;
(41) “Government” means the Central Government or the
Government of any State of the Indian Union ;
(42) "Public S treet" means any road, street, bridge, lane, square,
court, alley or passage from which the public has a right to
pass along, and includes on either side the drains or gutters and
the land up to the defined boundary of any abutting property
notwithstanding any projection over such land of any verandah
or other superstructure but does no t include any such road,
street, bridge, lane, square, court, alley or passage owned,
maintained or repaired by the State Government or the Central
Government or any other local authority;
(43) "Public S ervant” means a public servant as defined in sectio n
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Act no 45 of 1860) ;
(44) "Local A uthority" means and it includes a Gram Panchayat ;
----------------------------------------------

(45) "Public P roperty" and "public l and" means any public building,
park or garden or other place to which for the time being the
public have or are permitted to have access whether on payment
or otherwise;
(46) " Person in the service of the Government" does not include a
District Government Counsel, an Additional or Assistant
District Government Counsel, any other counsel engaged by the
Government and who has not paid monthly salary, a
Government counsel in State Government , a person h olding a
purely honorary office or a person who has retir ed from the
service of the Government;
(47) “District Planning Committee ” means a Committee constitute d
under article 243 – Z D of the Constitution of India ;
(48) “Family” means such group of persons in which spouse, son,
unmarried daughter, parents, brother or any other member who
is residing together and take food on one hearth.
1{(49) “Nagar Pramukh” means Chairman in case of nagar panchayat
in nagar panchayat area, Chairman of municipality in
municipality area and mayor of municipal corporation in
municipal corporation area;
(50) “Up -nagar Pramukh” means Vice chairman in case of nagar
panchayat in nagar panchayat area, Vice chairman of municipality
in municipality area and deputy mayor of municipal corporation
in municipal corporatio area.}
22{{((5511)) AApppprroopprriiaattee GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt”” mmeeaannss tthhrreeee ttiieerrss PPaanncchhaayyaatt ffoorr tthhee
ppuurrppoossee ooff sseeccttiioonn 88,, sseeccttiioonn 5533 aanndd sseeccttiioonn 9900..}}
Part II
Gram Sabha/ Gram Panchayat
Chapter –II
Establish ment a nd Constitution of Gram Sabhas and Gram
Panchayat , disqualifications and electoral rolls
Constitution of
Gram Sabha ,
Membership,
function and
Meetings etc. 3 (A) Gram Sabha - The State Government shall by notification in the
official Gazette , establish a Gram Sabha for a village or group of
villages by such name as may be specified;
Provided that where a Gram Sabha is established for a group of
villages, the name of the village having the largest population shall be
specified as the name of the Gram Sabha.
(B) Membership of Gram Sabha - An adult, who resides and whose
name i s for the time being included in the electoral roll for a Gram
Sabha shall be a member of that G ram Sabha (every person who has
complete d 18 years of age on first January of the every year shall be
entitled to register his name in the electrol roll)
----------------------------------------------

(C) Establishment of Gram Shabha and Removal of difficu lties
arises theirin - If in establishing a Gram Sabha or in the working of
a Gram Panchayat, any dispute or difficulty arises regarding the
interpretation of any provision s of this Act or any rule made
thereunder or any matter arising out of or relating to such
interpretation or any matter not provided in this Act , the same shall
be referred to the State Government whose decision thereon shall be
final and conclusive.
(D) Meetings and functions of the G ram Sabha -
(1) Every Gram Sabha shall hold four general meetings in each
year on the quarterly basis . Which shall be presided over by the
Pradhan of the concerned Gram Panchayat:
Provided that the Pradhan at any time may, or upon a
requisition in writing by the prescribed authority or by not less than
one­fifth of the number of the members shall, within thirty days
from the receipt of such requisition, can call an extraordinary
general meeting:
Provided further that where the Pradhan fails to call a
meeting as aforesaid the prescribed authority may do so within a
period to be prescribed.
(2) The meetings of Gram Sabha shall be orginased only in
Public/Government buildings or in open place of Gram Panchayat.
Explanation - Meeting called at the house of Pradhan/ Up -pradhan be
considered illegal .
(E) Quorum for convened meeting of Gaon Sabha - For the
conven ed meeting of Gram Sabha , 1/5 numbers of total members or
attendance of representatives of half families of total families shall
be essential.
Explana tion- Quorum for adjourned meeting , 1/10 number of
members of Gram Sabha or attendance of ¼ of representa tives
families out of total families is essensial. The fixation of number of
the families shall be based on the family register.
(F) Function and powers of Gram Sabha -
(1) The Gram Sabha shall consider the following matters and may
make recommendations and suggestions to the Gram Panchayat –
(i) the annual statement of accounts of the Gram Panchayat,
the report of administration of the preceding financial year and
the final audit note and replies, if any, made thereto;
(ii) the report of development pro grammes of the Gram
Panchayat relating to the preceding year and the development
progrmammes proposed to be undertaken during the current

financial year;
(iii) the promotion of unity and harmony among all sections
of society in the village;
(iv) programmes of primary and adult education within the
village;
(v) such all other public interest matters as may be prescribed.
(2) The Gram Panchayat shall give due consideration to the
recommendations and suggestions of the Gram Sabha.
(G) The Gram Sabha shall perf orm the following functions;
namely: -
(a) Mobilising voluntary labour and contributions for the
community welfare programmes;
(b) Rendering assistance in the implementation of
development sc hemes pertaining to the village;
(c) Identification of beneficiari es for the implementation of
development sc hemes pertaining to the village.
Constitution and
de-limitation of
Gram Panchayat 4 1- Gram Panchayat -
(1) The State Government may, by notification declare any area
comprising a village or group of villages, ha ving so far as
practicable a population of 500 in the hill area and a population of
one thousand, in pla ne area to be a Panchayat area for the purposes
of this Act by such name as may be specified;
Provided that maximum population in the hill area shall be
and 10000 for plane area as for as practicable or not more than
this but Gram Panchayat constituted prior to the date of
commencement of this Act unless not essential shall be as it is;
Provided further that for the purpos es of declaration of
Panchayat area to the revenue Gram shall not be divided ;
Provided further also that the Government may by order
relax said restrictions in the avoidable or special circumstances .
(2) The State Government may, on the r equest of the Gram
Panchayat concerned or otherwise and after previous publication of
the proposal, by notification at any time —
(a) modify the area of any Panchayat by including therein
or excluding therefrom any area of a village or group of
villages;
(b) alter the name of the Panchayat area; or
(c) declare that any area shall cease to be a Panchayat area.
(d) The constitution of G ram Panchayat shall be notified,
as such manner as may be prescribed and after that the
Gram Panchayat shall be deemed constituted as

appropriate whet her any vacancy is in existence;
Provided that constitution of Gram Panchayat shall
not be notified until two third of members including Pradhan
of Gram Panchayat not elected.
(3) The tenure of any member of the G ram Panchayat till the date
otherwise shall not be ended under the provisions of the Ac t, shall
be ended with the tenure of the Gram Panchayat .
(4) The Pradhan shall be ex -officio Member of Gram Panchayat .
(5) The delimitation of the territorial ele ctroll areas in the Gram
Panchayat shall be fixed in the manner prescribed .
2- Delimitation of the Area of Panchayat -
(1) The delimitation of the Panchayat areas shall be made in such
procedure as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(2) For the ev ery Panchayat area as such known name of Panchayat
area a Gram Panchayat which shall be corporate body, be
constituted.
(3) A Gram Panchayat shall consist of a Pradhan and in the case of a
Panchayat area having a population of –
(i) up to 1000 , - 7 memb ers;
(ii) up to 1001 to 2000 , - 9 members;
(iii) up to 2001 to 3000 , - 11 members;
(iv) up to 3001 to 5000 , - 13 members;
(v) more than 5001 , - 15 members.
3- [***].
Constitution and
reconstitution of
the Gram
Panchayat 5 If any existed area of the Gram Panchayat , in every district prior of
the ending of the ten ure or otherwise required for the purpo ses of
this Act is necessary, the n the State Government shall arrange the
constitution or reconstitution of the Gram Panchayat .
1{Effect of change
in population or
inclusion of the
area of Gram
Panchayat in
Nagar Palika, etc. 6 If the whole of the area of a Gram Panchayat is included in a
Nagar Nigam, Nagar Palika, Nagar Panchayat, cantonment,
notified ar ea or town area, the Gram Panchayat shall cease, and its
assets and liabilities shall be disposed of in the manner prescribed.
If a part of such area is so included, its jurisdiction shall be
reduced by that part and shall automatically not be in the
jurisdiction of Kshettra Panchayat or Zila Panchayat .}
----------------------------------------------
1- Subs . by section 3 of UK Act no 18of 2020 .
2- Omitted by section 2 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

Removal of
difficulty in the
establishment of
Gram Panchay at 7 If, in establishing a Gram Panchayat any dispute or difficulty arises
regarding the interpretation of any provision s of this Act or any rule
made thereunder or any matter arising out of or relating to such
interpretation or any matter not provided in this Act, the same shall
be referred to the State Government whose decision thereon shall be
final and conclusive.
Disqualification
for membership of
Gram Panchayat 8 (1) A pe rson shall be disqualified for being appoint ed, a Pradhan, Up pradhan and memb er of a Gram Panc hayat, if he -
(a) is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in
force for the purposes of elections to the State Legislature :
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground
that he is less than twenty -five years of age, if he has attained the
age of twenty -one years;
(b) is a salaried member of the Gram Panchayat ;
(c) holds any office of profit under a State Government or the
Central Government or any local authority, other than a Gram
Panchayat or owned or con trolled by any State Government or
Central Government or any Board, bodies or corporation owned
or controlled by any State Government or Central Government in
which Aaganbadi workers Assistant, Secretary of Cooperative
Committee and salary paid employees and working employees on
honorarium under the State and Central sponsored schemes shall
be include d;
(d) has been dismissed from the service of a State
Government, the Central Government or a local authority or other
Panchayat for misconduct;
(e) is in arrears of any tax, fee, duty or any other dues payable
by him for such period as may be prescribed, Gram Panchayat
[Kshettra Panchayat or Zila Panchayat] or has, inspite of being
required to do so failed to deliver to it any record or property
belonging to it which had come into his possession by virtue of his
holding any office under it;
(f) [he is Chairman, Vice chairman, councilor, Ward Member
or Member of any Municipal body] ;
(g) is an undischarged insolvent;
(h) has been convicted of an offence involving moral
turpitude;
(i) has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding
three months for contravention of any order made under the
Essential Commodities Act, 1955;
----------------------------------------------
1- Inserted by section 3(A) (i) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(j) [has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding six
months for contravention of any order made under the Essential
Suppl ies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946 or U.P. Control of
Supplies(Tempor ary Powers) Act, 1947 ];
(k) has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding three
months under the U.P. Excise Act, 1910 (as applicable to the State of
Uttarakhand );
(l) has been convicted of an offence under the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985;
(m) has been convicted of an election offence;
(n) has been convicted of an election offence under the U. P,
Removal of Social Disabilities Act, 1947 or the Protection of Civil
Rights Act, 1955 (as applicable to the State of Uttarakhand );
(o) has been rem oved from office under section 138 unless such
period, as has been provided in that behalf in the said section or such
lesser period as the State Government may have ordered in a particular
case has elapsed :
Provided that the disqualification under sub-section (5) shall
cease upon payment of arrears or delivery of the record or property, as
the case may be:
Provided further that a disqualification under any of the subsection referred to in the first proviso in the manner prescribed be
removed by the State Government.
(p) In place of women Pradhan, Up Pradhan and Member , if her
husband or other family members or relative preside the meetings and
discharged the duties of Gram Sabha, Gram Panchayat and declared
faulty the n said women and concer ning person presiding meetings and
discharging the duties, both shall be disqualified for forthcoming
general election of three tiers of Panchayat .
1{(q) He has not passed High School or equivalent examination from
any recognized institution/ Board:
2{Provided that in the matter of General Category women , Other
Backward Classes women and Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Tribes
candidate has not passed minimum Middle/ Eight examination; }2
(r) He has more than two living children.
(s) [If he or his family member or his legal heir is in unauthorized
possession of Government/ Panchayati raj land or get benefit from
such unauthorized possession ].
--------------------------------------------

(t) He has embezzled Government money or recovery of government
money is against him or is owed o f government money.
(u) He comes under the provisions of Section 8, Section 8A, Section 9,
.}
(2) Disqualification due to corruption - An authority competent to
decide election dispute s under this Act or the rules made thereunder may
declare any candidate found to have committed any corrupt practice to be
incapable, for any period not exceeding five years from the date of
declaration, of being chosen as a member of a Gram Panchayat , or place
in the gift or disposal of a Gram Panchayat.
(3) D isqualification for no toilets -
(a) If any person convicted by the competent court under the
provisions of the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers
and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013 , then he shall be disqualified for
contesting Panchayat election.
(b) If there is no toilets established in the house of those persons
residing in the jurisdiction of concerned Panchayat, they shall be
disqualified for the candidature o f the Panchayat at election.
(4) [if the entry related to any member is removed from the territorial
electoral roll or territorial constituency is partly completely included in any
municipal body, the member/ office bearer shall remain on his office/ post
till the cessation of tenure of the concerned Panchayat .]
(5) Decision on question as to disqualification - If any question arises as
to whether a person has become subject to any disqualification mentioned
in this Act, the question shall be referred to the prescribed authority for the
decision and his decision shall, subject to the result of any appeal as may
be prescribed, be final;
Provided that if any disqualification for duration of the said tenure
in which such rules is commencing t hen if omitted under any such law who
is authorised for omission than the name of such person from the electoral
roll of the said Gram Panchayat who is removed for such disqualification,
shall be placed remain at once.
(6) Punishment for failure to hando ver records, etc .-
(a) Any person on ceasing to act as Pradhan wilfully fails, in spite of
being required to do so by the prescribed authority, to handover all records,
money or oth er property or as the case may be, to his successor or to any
person authorised in this behalf by the prescribed authority, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with
fine or with both.
--------------------------------------------
1-Subs . by section 3(B) of UK Act no 12 of 2021 .

(b) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (a ), any
such money may on a certificate issued in that behalf by the prescribed
authority be recovered as arrears of land revenue.
(c) Such any person who is posted on any po st prior from the
ending of tenu re of any Gram Panchayat he shall obtain no dues
certificate from the successor or designated officer necessarily. Due to
not obtaining the no dues certificate, he shall not qualify for
participation in the next Panchayat elect ion.
(7) Prohibition of holding more than one post simultaneously -
Any perso n neither be candidate in the election from one or more
territorial constituencies election areas in the Gram Panchayat nor
he may hold one or more post in the Gram Panchayat.
1{(8) Further bar on holding two offices simultaneously -
(1) A person shall be disqualified for holding the office of Pradhan,
Up-pradhan or member of the Gram Panchayat, If he is -
(a) Member of the Parliament or State Legislature; or
(b) The Pramukh, senior Up -pramukh, junior Up -Pramukh or
member of any Kshettra Panchayat; or
(c) The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or Member of any Zila
Panchayat; or
2{(d) The Chairman or Vice -chairman or member of Committee
of management, of any co -operative society; or }
(e) The Nagar Pramukh, Up -Nagar Pramukh, member,
Chairman, Vice -Chairman or member of Urban Local
Bodies; or
(f) The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or member of cantonment
board.
(2) A person, shall cease to hold the office of Pradhan, Up -Pradhan or
member of the Gr am Panchayat, as the case may be if subsequently
he is elected to any of the offices mentioned in clauses (a) to (f) of
sub-section (1) with effect from the date of such subsequent
election and thereafter the post of Pradhan, Up -Pradhan or member,
as the c ase may be, shall be deemed casual vacancy. }
---------------------------------------------------

1{Electoral roll for
each territorial
constituency 9 (1) For each territorial constituency of Gram Panchayat, an electoral
roll shall be prepared, in accordance with the provisions of this Act
and the rules made thereunder/under the superintendence, direction
and control of the State Election Commission.
(a) Subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the
State Election Commission, the District Election Officer (Panchayat)
shall supervise and perform all functions relating to the preparation,
revision and correction of the electoral rolls i n the district in
accordance with this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(b) The preparation, revision and correction of the electoral
rolls shall be done by such persons, and in such manner, as may be
prescribed;
(2) Th e electoral roll referred to in clause (b) sub-section (1) shall be
published in the prescribed manner and upon its publication it shall,
subject to any alteration, addition or modification made in accordance
with this Act and the rules made thereunder be the electoral roll for
that ter ritorial constituency.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (4), (5), (6) and (7) every
person who has attained the age of 18 (eighteen) years on the first day
of January of the year in which the electoral roll is prepared or revised
and who is ordinary resident in the territorial constituency of a Gram
Panchayat shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that
territorial constituency.
Explanation –
(i) A person shall not be deemed to be ordinarily resident in
the territorial constituency on the ground only that he owns,
or is in possession of, a dwelling house in that territorial
constituency.
(ii) A person absenting himself temporarily from his place of
ordinary residence shall not by reason thereof shall be deemed
to cease to be ordinarily resident therein,
(iii) A member of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State
shall not, during the term of his office, cease to be ordinarily
resident in the territorial constituency merely be reason of his
absence from that area in connection with his duties as such
member.
(iv) For determining that which persons may not be deemed
to the ordinarily residents of any particular area at any
relevant time, any other facts which may be prescribed, shall
be considered.
(v) If in any cas e a question arises as to where a person is
ordinarily resident at any relevant time, the question shall be
determined with reference to all the facts of the case.
-------------------------------------------------

(4) A person shall be disqualified for registrat ion in an electoral roll, if he –
(a) is not a citizen of India; or
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(c) is for the time being disqualified from voting under provisions of
any law relating to corrupt practices and other offences in connection
with elections.
(5) The name of any person who becomes disqualified under sub -section (4)
after registration shall forthwith be struck off the electoral roll in which it is
included;
Provided that the name of any person which is struck off from the
electoral roll by reason of any such disqualification shall forthwith be reinstated
in that roll, if such disqualification is, during the period such roll is in force,
removed under any law authorizing such removal.
(6) No person shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for more than
one territorial constituency or more than once in the electoral roll for the same
territorial constituency.
(7) No person shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for any
territorial constituency if his name is entered in any electoral roll pertaining to
any, municipal corporation, municipality, Nagar Panchayat or cantonment
unless he shows that his name has been st ruck off from such electoral roll.
(8) Where the State Election Commission is satisfied after making such inquiry
as it may deem fit, whether on an application made to it or suo moto, that any
entry in the electoral roll should be corrected or deleted or that the name of any
person entitled to be registered should be added in the electoral roll, it shall
subject to the provisions of this Act and rules and orders made thereunder,
correct, delete or add the entry, as the case may be :
Provided that no such correction, deletion or addition shall be made
after the last date for making nominations for any election in the Gram
Panchayat and before the completion of that election;
Provided further that no deletion or correction of any entry in respect of
any pe rson affecting his interest adversely shall be made without giving him
reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the action proposed to be
taken in relation to him.
(9) The State Election Commission may, if it thinks necessary so to do for the
purposes of a general or by election, direct a special revision of the electoral
roll for any territorial constituency of a Gram Panchayat in such manner as it
may think fit:
Provided that subject to the other provisions of this Act, the electoral roll
for territorial constituency, as in force at the time of issue of any such direction,
shall continue to be in force until the completion of the special revision so
directed.
(10) As so far as provision not made by this Act or the rules, the State E lection
Commission may, by order, may make provisions in respect of the following
matters concerning the electoral roll, namely, -
----------------------------------------

(a) the date on which the electoral roll prepared under this Act shall come
into force and its period of operation;
(b) the correction of any existing entry in the electoral roll on the
application the elector concerned;
(c) the correction of clerical or printing errors in electoral roll;
(d) the inclusion of the name of su ch per son in the electoral roll –
(i) whose name is included in the Assembly electoral roll for the area
related to the territorial constituency but not included in the electoral
roll for territorial constituency or whose name has been wrongly
included in the e lectoral roll of other territorial constituency, or
(ii) whose name is not so included in the Assembly electoral roll but
who is otherwise eligible to be registered in the electoral roll for the
territorial constituency;
(e) the custody and preservation of the electoral roll;
(f) fees payable on application for inclusion or exclusion of names;
(g) all matters generally relating to the preparation and publication of the
electoral roll.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -section the
State Election Commission may, for the purposes of preparation of the
electoral roll for a territorial constituency adopt the electoral roll for the
Assembly constituency prepared under Representation of the People Act,
for the time being in force so far as it relates to the area of that
territorial constituency;
Provided that, no amendment, alteration or correction in the electoral
roll for such territorial constituency shall be included after the last date of
nomination in such constituency and before the completion of that election.
(12) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction –
(a) to entertain or adjudicate upon the question whether any person is or
is not entitled to be registered in an electoral roll for a territorial
constituency; or
(b) to question the legality of any action taken by or under the authority
of the State Election Commission or of any decision given by any
Authority or Officer appointed in this behalf in respect of preparation
and publication of electoral rolls.
(13) Right to vote etc . – Save as otherwise provided by or under this Act,
every person whose name is for the time being included in the electoral roll
for a territorial consistency of a Gram Panchayat shall be entitled to vote at
any election and be eligible for el ection, nomination or appointment to any
office in that Gram Panchayat:
Provided that a person who has not completed the age of twenty -one
years shall not be eligible to be elected as a member or office -bearer of the
Gram Panchayat. }
--------- ----------------------------------------

Chapter –III
Gram Panchay at and its office bearer s and their election
Pradhan and
Up-Pradhan of
Gram Panchayat 10 There shall be a Pradhan and an U p-Pradhan of the Gram Panchayat ,
who shall respectively be t he Chairperson and Vice -Chaiperson
thereof. The election of Pradhan and Up Pradhan etc. shall be held
as may be prescribed.
1{Reservation for the
post of Pradhan 10-A (1) The State Government may, by order, reserve the seat of Pradhan
for Scheduled Cast es, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes.
The number of seats of Pradhan so reserved for the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes or the Backward Classes shall as
nearly as may be, bear the same proportion to the total number of
such seats as the popula tion of the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes or the Backward Classes of the State bears to the
total population of the State:
Provided that reservation for the Backward Classes shall not
exceed 14 percent of tota l number of the seat of Pr adhan:
2{Provided further that if the figures of population of
Backward Classes are not available, their population may be
determined by carrying out a survey in the prescribed manner.}
(2) Not less than one half of the total number of reserved
seats of Pradhan under sub section (1) shall be reserved for the
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Classes, as the case may be.
(3) Not less than one half seat of total number of seats of
Pradhan, under sub -section (2) shall be reserved for women.
(4) The seats reserved for Pradhan under this Section shall be
allotted in different Gram Panchayat by rotation in such order, as
may be prescribed.
(5) The reservation for seats of the Pradhan for Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes under this Section shall not be
effective at the end of the period specified in a rticle 334 of the
Constitution of India. }1
3{Explanation : Nothing in this section shall prevent the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the
Backward Classes and the women from contesting election to
unreserved places/ constituency .}
1{Election of Pradhan 10-B (1) The Pradhan of the Gram Panchayat shall be elected by the
persons registe red in the electoral rolls for the territorial
constituencies of the Panchayat area from amongst themselves.
--------------------------------------------------

(2) If at any general election of a Gram Panchyat, the
Pradhan is not elected, and less than two -thirds of the total number
of members of Gram Panchayat are elected, the State Government or
an officer authorized by it in this behalf may, by order, either
appoint –
(i) an Administrative Committee consisting of such number
of persons qualified to be elected as members of the
Gram Panchayat, as it may consider proper; or
(ii) an Administrator.
(3) The me mbers of the Administrative Committee or the
Administrator shall hold office for such period not exceeding six
months as the State Government may specify in the order referred to
in sub -section (2).
(4) On the appointment of an Administrative Committee o r
and Administrator under sub -section (2), the person, if any, chosen
as Pradhan or member of the Gram Panchayat before such
appointment shall cease to be such Pradhan or member, as the case
may be, and all powers, functions and duties of the Gram Panchaya t,
its Pradhan and Committees shall vest in and be exercised,
performed and discharged by such Administrative Committee or the
Administrator, as the case may be.
(5) The Administrative Committee or the Administrator shall be
deemed to be duly constitut ed Gram Panchayat for the purposes of
this Act :
Provided that if at any time after the appointment of the
Administrative Committee or the Administrator under sub -section
(2) the State Government is satisfied that there is no difficulty in
duly constitut ing the Gram Panchayat, the State Government may,
notwithstanding that the period for which the Administrative
Committee or the Administrator had been appointed has not expired,
direct the State Election Commission for holding the elections for
constitutin g the Gram Panchayat.
(6) Save as otherwise provide in this Act, the term of office of
Pradhan shall expire with the term of the Gram Panchayat. }
1{Election of Up Pradhan and his
term
10-C The Up -Pradhan, shall be elected by the members of th e Gram
panchayat from amongst themselves in such manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that if a Gram panchayat fails to so elect the Up Pradhan within the time fixed by or under the rules in that behalf,
the Prescribed Authority may nominate as Up -Pradha n any member;
of the Gram Panchayat, and the person so nominated shall be
deemed to have been duly elected.
-----------------------------------------------------

(2) The term of office of the Up -Pradhan sh all commence from the
date of his election or nomination, as the case may be, and unless
otherwise determined under the provisions of the Act, shall expire
with the term of the Gram Panchayat.
(3) The Provision of Section 18 shall Mutatis Mutandis apply
to the removal of Up -Pradhan as they apply to the removal of
Pradhan.}
The provision s of
reservation on the
post for the
Scheduled Caste,
Scheduled Tribes ,
Backward Classes,
Women in the Gram
Panchayat 11 (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Caste s, Scheduled
Tribes and Backward Classes in every Gram Panchayat and t he
number of seats so reserved for th e Scheduled Castes, the Schedul ed
Tribes or the Backward Classes in the Gram Panvcha yat shall bear
as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the to tal number of such
seats as the population of the Scheduled Castes in Panchayat area or
of the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayat area or of the Backward
Classes in the Panchayat area bears to the total population of such
area and such seats may be alloted by rotation to different territorial
constituencies;
Provided that the reservation for the Backwards classes
shall not exceed fourteen percent of the total number of Gram
Panchayat;
Provided further that if the figures of population of the
Backward Classes are not available, their population may be
determined by carrying out a survey in the prescribed manner;
Provided further also that not less than one half of the total
number shall be reserved for women belonging to the Schedule d
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Backward Classes.
(2) Not less than one half of the total number, including the number
reserved under third proviso of sub -section (1), shall be reserved for
women and the reserved under this section shall be allotted by
rotation to different Gram Panchayats in such as may be prescribed.
Explanation –Nothing in this section shall prevent persons
belonging to the Scheduled Cast es, the Scheduled Tribes, the
Backward Classes and the women from contesting election to
unres erved seats.
Term of Gram
Panchayat and his
office bearers 12 (1) Every Gram Panchayat unless sooner dissolved under the
provision s of this Act, shall continue for five years from the date
fixed of its first meetings and no longer .
(2) If under the p rovisions of this Act the tenure of any member of
any Gram Panchayat otherwise is not removed then there tenure
shall be held till the end of concerning Panchayat .
(3) Subject to the provisions made otherwise under this Act, the
tenure of Pradhan, Up Pradh an of any Panchayat shall be extend up
to the tenure of concerning Panchayat .

Mode of election 13 1{The election for the post of Pradhan, Up-Pradhan and Member of
any Gram Panchayat shall be made by Ballot Paper or EVM through
the secret ballot proced ure;
Provided that there shall be no bar on the Panchayat to
elect unopposed the office holders mentioned in this Section}
The sup erintenden ce
of election of the
Gram Panchayat
and constitution of
the State Election
Commission etc. 14 (1) The conduct, superintendence, direction and control of the
elections of Pradhan, Up Pradhan, Member of the Gram Panchayat
shall be vested in a State Election Commission constituted at State
level .
(2) Subject to the superintendence, direction and contro l of the State
Election Commission, the State Election Commissioner shall
supervise and perform all function relating matters of the conduct
for the post of Pradhan, Up Pradhan and Members .
(3) The State Government shall, with the consultation of the Sta te
Election Commission, by notification appoint a date or dates for
general election or by election of the Pradhan, Up Pradhan and
Members of any Gram Panchayat .
Chapter IV
Resign, removal, fulfi lment of the casual vacancies of the Panchayat
office bearers and internal and external control their -in

Resign ation of office
bearers of Gram
Panchayat 15 A Pradhan , Up-Pradhan of any Gram Panchayat may, by writing
under his hand addressed to concerning Zila Panchayat Raj
Adhikari, resign from his post ;
Provided that if resign ation is not accepted within the period
of 15 days from the date of submissi on by writing under his hand
then the resign ation shall be deemed sanctioned automatically and
resigning office bearers shall not be deemed in hi s post and such
posts shall be deemed vacant automatically from such dates.
filling of Casual
vacancies of the post
of Pradhan of the
Gram Panchayat 16 If any vacancy arises (before the expiration of a period of six
months from the date of vacancy) in the office of Pradhan, Up Pradhan or of a member of a Gram Panchayat by reason of his
death, removal, resignation, voidance of his election or refusal to
take oath of the office, then it shall be filled as for as possible for the
remainder of his term , in the manner wh ich may prescribed;
Provided that if on the date of occurrence of such vacancy the
residue of the term of the Gram Panchayat is less than six months,
then such vacancy shall not be filled.
---------------------------------------------- -------

Arrangement in case
of temporary
vacancy of the post
of Pradhan 17 Where the office of Pradhan is vacant due to illness or any other
reason, Pradhan is in capable to perform his act and the post of Up
Pradhan is vacant or when Up Pradhan during the vacancy of the post
of Pradhan is unable to act under the provisions of this Act and they
are incapable to do their act, the n till the date of re joining his duties , the
prescribed authority shall nominate a member of a G ram Panchayat to
discharge the duties and exercise the powers of the Pradhan until such
vacancy or incapacity in the office of either the Pradhan or Up Pradhan
is filled in, or removed respectively until such incapacity of either of
the remove d.
Motion of no
confidence against
Pradhan and Up
pradhan 18 (1) Pradhan - A written notice of intention to make the motion signed
by at least one fourth members of the total number of members of the
time being Gram Sabha together with a copy of the propo sed motion by
minimum five members making signature in the written notice shall be
produced to the Zila Panchayat Raj Adhikari in-person .
(2) No confidence motion against Up Pradhan - A written notice of
intention of such proposal shall be addressed to th e prescribed officer.
A written notice of intention to make the motion signed by at least half
of the total elected members of the time being Gram Panchayat
together with a copy of the proposed motion by minimum three
members making signature in the writte n notice shall be produced to
the Zila Panchayat Raj Adhikari in-person .
(3) Proce eding on receiving no confidence motion against the
Pradhan or Up Pradhan of Gram Panchayat - On received notice of
no-confidence motion against the Pradhan,Up Pradhan after the formal
examination of such notice the Zila Panchayat Raj Officer shall
convene a special meeting for no -confidence motion and for such
meeting be not below the rank of the Assistant Development Officer
(Panchayat ) shall also be appoint ed as a Chairman . The special meeting
for non confidence motion shall be convened at Panchayat building or
any public place.
(4) It shall be such necessary for such special meeting a prior notice of
days and for completion of all pr ocedure within 30 days from the
date of submission.
(5) The quorum for such special meeting shall be half of the total
members. The motion shall be deemed passed by more than half
majority of the total members of the Gram Sabha. In absence of
quorum or in case of non passing of the motion a non confidence
motion shall not be taken till one year against the concerning Pradhan .
(6) A non confidence motion against the Up Pradhan shall be deemed
passed by the majority of the two third elected members of the Gram
Panchayat ;
--------------- --------------------------

Provided that a no -confidence motion against the Pradhan and Up
Pradhan may not be made within the period of one year of his election
or within the period of prior to six month from the ending of his tenure.
Powers of State
Govern ment in case
of default of Gram
Panchayat 19 (1) If at any time, upon representation made or otherwise, it appears
to the State Government that a Gram Panchayat, or joint Committee, or
other Committee has made default in performing a duty imposed on it
by or under this Act or any other enactment, the State Government may,
by order in writing, fix a period for the performance of that duty.
(2) If that duty is not performed with the period so fixed, the State
Government, may appoint the District Magis trate, or any other
competent authority to perform it and may direct that the expense, if
any, of performing the duty shall be paid within such time as may be
fixed by the District Magistrate or any other person authorized by the
State Government in this b ehalf, by the Gram Panchayat .
(3) If the expense is not so paid, the other prescribed officer
authorised by the Director, Panchayati Raj, may by the previous
sanction of the State Government, give such order directing the
authority having the custody of t he Gram Nidhi to pay the expenses
from such fund .
External control of
Gram Panchayat 20 The prescribed authority for Gram Panchayat shall be Zila Panchayat
Raj Adhikari. The powers, duties, acts, external control etc. of the
prescribed authority shall be such as may be prescribed from time to
time by the State Government.
Chapter -V
Meetings, Functions, Duties, Powers and administration o f Gram
Panchayats
Meetings of Gram
Panchayat 21 (1) A Gram Panchayat shall ordinarily meet s for the transaction of
business at least once in a month but intervene between two consecutive
meetings shall not be m ore tha n two months .
(2) The meetings of the Gram Panchayat shall be held at such place ,
date and time in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation - The con vened procee dings of meeting at the residence
of Gram Pradhan / Up Pradhan shall be deemed illegal.
(3) Quorum - The quorum for the meeting of Gram Panch ayat shall
be one third of the total members , including Pradhan and Up Pradhan.
For any adjourned meet ing the quorum shall be one third but when,
quorum of the meeting is not complited second time, then the quorum
for next meeting shall be one fifth.
(4) The procedure etc. in the meetings of Gram Panch ayat shall be
such as may be prescribed from time to t ime by the State Government.
----------------------------------------------

(5) Requirement of representation etc. and write the question of the
Gram Panchayat shall be such as may be prescribed from time to
time by the state Government.
(6) Noth ing in this Act confers any right to someone, within the
territory of Nagar Nigam, Nagar palika 1{Parishad} , Nagar
Panchayat, Notified area, Cantonment or Town area, to use any such
right, which is vested in Nagar Nigam, Nagar Palika1{Parishad} ,
Nagar Panc hayat, Notified area committee, Cantonment Board,
District magistrate or in any other Magistrate or in Town area
committee, as the case may be;
Provided that the Gram panchayat -
(a) may construct, maintain and control any school, library, hospital,
dispensary, poor house, asylum, orphanage, inspection house or
other building or institution which is not maintained exclusively for
the benefit of persons residing within the aforesaid limits, and
(b) may do anything within the aforesaid limits , when the doing of
which is necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this
Act.
General functions of
Gram Panchayat 22 (1) Subject to such conditions as may be specified by the State
Government through notification, may entrust provide all or ad ditional
or any of the following functions to the Gram Panchayat, -
(i) make pla nning for the development of Panchayat and after
approval of Gram Sabha forwarded it to the prescribed authority;
(ii) prepare annual budget of Gram Sabha and after passing from
Gram Sabha, forwarded it to the prescribed authority;
(iii) to help in performance for the relief in case of the natural
calamity;
(iv) to manage voluntary donation of work and contribution for
community works;
(v) to maintain necessary data and data base of the Panchayat;
(vi) to present/ submit the detail of performed works by the Gram
Panchayat in the meeting of Gram Sabha;
(vii) to maintain information register for stranger, who entered in
the area of Gram Sabha;
(viii) other functions which fall s in his jurisdiction under this Act
or as delegated by the higher level;
(ix) Settlement and management of land;
-----------------------------------

Provided that it does not include the transfer of any
property for the time being vested in the Gram Panchayat under
Reforms Act, 1950 (as applicable in Uttarakhand State) or under
any other provision s of said Act (or arrangeme nt made by the
Government on this matter ),
(x) the preservation, maintenance and development of forests
and trees;
(xi) the maintenance and development of abadi sites and
means of village communications;
(xii) the management of hats, bazare and melas;
(xiii) the maintenance and development of fisheries and tanks;
(xiv) to conduct and prosecution of suits and proceedings by
or against the Gram Panchayat relating to or arising out of the
functions of Samiti ;
(xv) the performance of specifically assigned functions to the
Land Management Committee under the U. P. Zamindari
Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (as applicable in
Uttrakhand S tate) or any other enactme nt; and
(xvi) any other matter relating to such management,
preservation and control as may be prescribed ;
Explanation -
(1) No member or office bearer of a Gram Panchayat or, Land
Management Committee shall, otherwise than the permission in
writing of the District Magistrate knowingly acquire or attempt to
acquire any share or interest in any licence, lease, sale, exchange,
contract or employment with, by or on behalf of the Samiti
concerned;
Provided that any person have interest in such sale,
through which the concerned land management committee believes that
he regularl y trades, and the value of sold thing is not exceeding ten
thousand rupees.
(2) No Court or other officer shall enforce at the instance of any
person 's claim based upon a transaction made in the contravention
of the provisions of sub -section (1);
Provided that when the Gram Panchayat shall work as land
management committee the n the 1{Revenue Sub inspector
(patwari)/ Lekhpal} of the revenue department shall act as a
Secretary of the Gram Panchayat.
---------------------------------- -------
1- Substituted by section 6 of Uk Act no 12 o 2021.

Other Functions of
Gram Panchayat 23 Subject to such conditions as may be specified by the State
Government, from time to time a Gram Panchayat shall perform the
following functions; namely : -
(i) Agriculture including extension of agricultural :
(a) Promotion and Development of agriculture and
horticulture;
(b) Development of wastelands and grazing lands and
preventing their unauthorized transition and use,
(ii) Land development, land reform implementation, land
consolidation and soil conservation :
(a) Assisting the Government and other agencies in land
development, land reform and soil conservation;
(b) Assisting in land consolidation;
(iii) Minor irrigation, water management and watershed
development :
a. Managing and assisting in water distribution from
minor irrigation projects;
b. Construction, repair and maintenance of minor
irrigation projects, regulation of supply of water for
irrigation purpose;
(iv) Animal husbandry, dairy industry and poultry farming :
a. Improving breed of cattle, poultry and other live stock;
b. Promotion of dairy industry and poultry farming,
piggery etc.
(v) Fisheries : Development of fisheries in the village s;
(vi) Social and farm forestry :
a. Planting and preserving trees on the sides of roads
and pu blic land ;
b. Development and promotion of social and farm
forestry and sericulture;
(vii) Minor forest product :
Promotion and dev elopment of minor forest product ;
(viii) Small industries :
a. Assisting the development of small industry ;
b. Promotion of local trades;
(ix) Cottage and village industry :
a. Assisting in the development of agricu ltural and
commercial industry ;
b. Promotion of cottage, industry ;

(x) Rural housing :
a. Implementation of rural housing programmes;
b. Distribu tion of house sites and maintenance of
records relating to the m;
(xi) Drinking water : Construction, repair and maintenance of
public wells, tanks and ponds for supply of water for
drinking, washing, bathing purposes and regulation of
sources of water supply for drinking purposes.
(xii) Fuel and fodder land :
a. Development of bamboo and plants relating to fuel
and fodder land ;
b. Control on irregular transfer of fodder land.
(xiii) Roads, culverts, bridges, ferr ypiers, water -ways and
other means of communication :
a. Consturction and maintenance of village roads,
bridges, ferrypiers and culve rts;
b. Maintenance of water -ways;
c. Removal of encroachment on public places.
(xiv) Rural electrification :
Provision s for maintenance of lighting of public
street and other places.
(xv) Non-conventional energy source :
Promotion and development of programmes of
non- conventional energy source and its maintenance in
village.
(xvi) Poverty alleviation programmes :
Promotion and implementation of poverty alleviation
programmes.
(xvii) Education including primary and secondary schools ;
Public awareness about education.
(xviii) Technical training and vocational educaton :
Promotion of rural art artisans.
(xix) Adult and informal education :
promotion of adult literacy.
(xx) Library :
Establishment and maintenance of libraries and reading
rooms.
(xxi) Sports and cultural affairs :
a. Promotion of social and cultural activities;

b. Organising cultural seminars on different festivals;
c. Establishment and maintenance of rural clubs for
sports.
(xxii) Markets and fairs :
Regulation of melas, markets and hats in Panchayat
areas.
(xxiii) Medical and sanitation :
a. Promoting rural sanitation;
b. Prevention against epidemics;
c. Programmes of human and animal vaccination;
d. Preventive actions against stray cattle and live -stock ;
e. Registering birth, death and marriage .
(xxiv) Promotio n and implementation of family welfare
programmes.
(xxv) economic development and child development :
Preparation of plan for economic development of the
area of the Gram Panchayat.
(xxvi) Maternity and child development :
a. Participation in the implementation of women an d
child welfare programmes at Gram Panchayat level;
b. Promoting child health and nutrition programmes.

(xxvii ) 1{Social welfare including welfare of the handicapped
and mentally retarded :
(a) Assisting in old -age and widow pension schemes;
(b) Participation in the social welfare programmes
including welfare of the handicapped and the mentally
retarded. }
(xxviii )Welfare of the weaker sections and in particular of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes :
a. Participation in the implementation of the specific
programmes f or the Scheduled Caste s and the
Scheduled Tribes and Other Weaker S ections of the
society;
b. Preparation and implementation of schemes for social
justice.
-----------------------------------------------------

(xxix) Public Distribution system :
a. Promotion of public awareness with regard to the
distribution of essential commodities;
b. Monitoring the public distribution system.
(xxx) Maintenance of community assets preservation and
maintenance of community assets.
Rights of
Gram Panchayat as
to public
streets, water -
ways and other
matters
A Gram Panchayat shall have control of all public streets,
waterways, other than canals as defined in sub -section (1) of section
of the Northern India Canal and Drainage Act, 1873, situate within
its jurisdiction not being a private street or waterways and not being
under the control of the State Government or the Zila Pancahayat or
any other authority specified by the State Government and may do all
things necessary for the ma intenance and repair thereof and may -
(a) construct new bridges culverts;
(b) divert, discontinue or close any public street; culvert or
bridge;
(c) widen, open, enlarge or otherwise improve any public
street, culvert or bridge with minimum damage to th e
neighbo uring fields ;
(d) deepen or otherwise improve waterways;
(e) with the sanction of the prescribed authority and where
a canal exists under the Northern India Canal and Drainage Act,
1873, with the sanction also of such officer of the Irrigation
Department as the State Government may prescribe, undertake
small irrigation projects in addition to those specified by order
under this section ;
(f) cut any hedge or branch of any tree projecting on a
public street;
(g) notify the setting apart of an y public watercourse for
drinking or culinary purposes, and prohibit bathing, washing of
clothes and animals or doing of other acts likely to pollute the
course so set a part;
Provided that nothing shall be done under clause (g) whi ch
may affect a cana l governed by the Northern India Canal and
Drainage Act, 1873, without the prior permission of the authority
prescribed by the State Government in this behalf.
Improvement of
sanitation by Gram
Panchayat 25 For the improvement of sanitation, a Gram Panch ayat may, by
notice, direct the owner or occupier of any land or building, taking
into consideration his financial position and giving him reasonable
time for compliance thereof -
(a) or close, remove, alter, repair, cleanse disinfect or put in
good order any latrine, urinal, water -closet, drains, cesspool or

other receptacle for filth, sullage water, rubbish or refuse
pertaining to such land or building or to remove or alter any door
or trap or construct any drain for any such latrine, urinal or
water -closet which opens on to a street or drain, or to shut off
such latrine, urinal or water closet by a sufficient roof and wall
or fence from the view of persons passing by or dwelling in the
neighbo urhood ;
(b) to cleanse, repair, cover, fill up, drain off, de epen or to
remove water from a private well, tank, reservoir, pool, pit,
depression at excavation therein which may appear to the Gram
Panchayat to be injurious to health or offensive to the
neighborhood;
(c) to close clear off any vegetation, undergrowth , prickly
pear or shrub -jungle ;
(d) to remove any dirt, dung, night soil, manure or any
noxious or offensive matter therefrom and to cleanse the land or
building ;
Provided that a person on whom a notice under clause (b)
is served may, within 30 days of the receipt of the notice appeal
to the District Medical Officer of Health against the said notice
who may vary, set aside or confirm it.
Rights of Gram
Panchayat for
maintenance and
improvement of
schools and
hospitals 26 (1) (a) subject to such rule s as may be prescribed by State
Government concern Gram Panchayat shall be responsible for
curriculum, employmen t and qualification of teachers and
supervision of a school, maintain any existing primary school
including the buildings and furniture thereof and be responsible for
its proper working and may similarly establish and maintain a new
school or improve any existing school;
(b) shall subject to such rules as may be prescribed by State
Government concern Gram Panchayat regarding the establishment,
maintenance and supervision, maintain any existing Ayurvedic,
Homoeopathic or Unani hospital or dispensary including the
building and equipments thereof and may similarly establish and
maintain a new hospital or dispensary for one or more of the
systems of me dicine mentioned above.
(2) The Zila panchayat and the State Government may m ake
such grants for school, hospital or dispensaries mentioned in sub section (1) as may be prescribed .
-----------

Representation and
recommendations by
Gram Panchayat 27 A Gram Panchayat may make to the appropiate authority -
(a) any representation concerning the welfare of the persons
residing within its jurisdiction, and
(b) any recommendations as to the appointment, transfer or
dismissal of a n employee of all Depart ment, serving in any
area within the jurisdiction of such Gram Panchayat.
Preparation of plans
by Gram Panchayat 28 A Gram Panchayat shall prepare every year a development plan in
such form as may be prescribed by State Government and submit it
to the con cerned prescribed authority before such date as may be
prescribed.
Rights of Gram
Panchayat to frame
bye-laws 29 (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder and the by e-laws, if any, made by the prescribed
authority, a Gra m Panchayat may make by-laws, namely -
(a) to prohibit the removal or use of water for drinking
purposes from any source which is likely to cause danger
to health and to prohibit the doing of anything likely to
contaminate any source of drinking water;
(b) to prohibit or regulate the discharge of water from any
drain or premises on a public street or into a river, pond,
tank, well, or any other place;
(c) to prevent damage of public property and Gram
Panchayat property;
(d) to regulate sanitation conser vancy and drainage in the
area of Gram Panchayat ;
(e) to prohibit or regulate the use of public streets or other
public places by shop -keepers or other individuals or
collection to market tolls on public streets;
(f) to regulate the manner in which tanks , ponds and
cesspools, pasture land, playground, manure pits, land for
disposal of dead bodies and bathing places shall be
maintained and used;
(g) to regulate any other duties or f unctions of the Gram
Panchayat as may be directed by the prescribed author ity.
(2) The draft of bye -laws framed by Gram Panchayats shall
be published in the prescribed manner. Any objections received
thereto shall be considered at a meeting o f the Gram Panchayat
and the bye -laws shall then be submitted together with the
objecti ons, if any, received and the decisions taken thereon to the
prescribed authority. The bye -laws as sanctioned by the prescribed
authority shall come into force after they have been published in
the prescribed manner;
-------------

Provided that the S tate Government at any time rescind or
modify any by e-laws so approved.
Pradhan, Up
Pradhan, all officers
and employees of a
Gram Panchayat to
be public servants 30 Pradhan, Up Pradhan, officer and servants, shall be deemed to
be a public servant within t he meaning of the 1{section 21 of Indian
Penal Code,1860} and the word "Government" provided in section
of said Code shall, for the purpose of this sect ion, be deemed to
include Gram P anchayat :
2{PPrroovviiddeedd tthhaatt PPuubblliicc SSeerrvvaanntt sshhaallll bbee ddeeeemmeedd ttoo bbee aa PPuubblliicc
SSeerrvvaanntt iinn iitt’’ss GGrraamm PPaanncchhaayyaatt jjuurriissddiiccttiioonn AArreeaa..}}
Delegation of
powers by the Gram
Panchayat 31 Such powers, duties and functions of the Gram P anchayat which
are not delegated to the Pradhan under the provisions of this Act,
such powers and functio ns ma y be delegate d by the resolution to
any committee of Gram Panchayat or Up Pradhan .
Duties and powers
of the Pradhan of
Gram Panchayat 32 (1) The d uties and powers of Pradhan unless otherwise provided
by this Act , shall be as follows -
(a) convene and preside the meetings of Gram Sabha and
Gram Panchayat and their Committees;
(b) preside Gram Sabha, Gram Panch ayat or such committees
in which he is Chairman under this Act.
(2) For the disposal of work in all meetings of Gram Sabha or
Gram Panch ay at, he/she shall control according to the regulations
or rules made for this purpose .
(3) Shall supervise on the financial administration of Gram
Panchayat and superintendence of Executive A dministration and if
found any i rregula rity come to the knowledge of Gra m Panchayat
and Gram Sabha.
(4) shall perform such other duties who is delegated to him by this
Act or rules, regulation, byelaws or by other any law time being in
force made their under required by him.
(5) to updated all records of Gram Panchayat by the Secretary
subject to the custody of Gram Pradhan.
(6) any member of the Gram Panchayat may submit any resolution
in the meeting and can ask question in prescribed method relating
to the concerning subject of administration of Gram panchayat
from Pradhan o r Up Pradhan.
--------------------

1{Duties of Up pradhan 32-A (1) The Up -Pradhan shall discharge all functions duties and
responsibili ties in absence of the Pradhan.
(2) The Up -Pradhan shall preside the standing committees, of
which he is Ex Officio Chairman and shall submit the details
to the Gram Panchayat by hearing the functions of the
concerned committee.
(3) The Up -Pradhan shall d ischarge the delegated powers and
duties under section 31 of the Act.
(4) The Up -Pradhan shall assist the Pradhan in the discharge of
functions and liabilities of the Gram Panchayat. }
Office of Gram
Panchayat 33 The Office of Gram Panchayat shall be loca ted at Panchayat
building in public place and any other Government building.
Delegation of i ts
powers by the
Pradhan to Up
pradhan of Gram
Panchayat 34 Pradhan of the Gram Panchayat may make transfer of his duties and
power s to the Up pradhan.
Committee s of the
Gram panchayat 35 Every Gram Panchayat shall constitute such committee or
committees as may be notified by the State Government from time
to time, to assis t the Gram Panchayat in the performance of all or
any of its functions within 90 days from t he da te of constitution of
the Gram Panchayat under this Act. The Gram Panchayat may
delegate their such powers and functions as it deem fit for the
performance of functions of the Gram Panchayat , its committee s and
such sub committees and their Chairman, Members, quorum and
other provisions shall be such as may be prescribed.
2{Appointment of
women member as
Chairman in
Education
Committee and
Health and Welfare
Committee 35-A The woman member shall be appointed as Chairman in the
Education Committee and Health and Welfare Committee of Gram
Panchayat, as may be prescribed in the rules}
Chapter VI
The officers and employees of the Gram Panchayat and penalties and
procedure for violation and infringement of the provisions of the Act
Officers, Employees/
Secretary of the
Gram Panchayat 36 (1) For every Gram Panchayat or group of the Gram panchayat as
may be prescribed by the State Government there shall be a full time
Gram Panchayat officer/Secretary. The Gram Panchayat by the special
resolution for the conduct of their business may also appoint any other
employees with the prior approval of the prescribed officer .
-----------------------------------------------------------

(2) The State Government may by genral or special order , any
employee or class of employees serving in connection with the affairs
of the State to serve under the Gram Panchayats with such designation
as may be specified in the order and such employees shall serve under
the control and supervision of Gram Panchayat and follow such duties,
which may be specified by the State Government from time to time .
(3) The State Government may direct any other Government
servant to assist the said G overnment servent.
Power, duties and
functions of the
officers of Gram
Panchayat 37 The Power s, duties and functions of the officers and other employees
of Gram Panchayat shall have as may be prescribed.
Dispute between
Gram Panchayat
and Nagar
Pancha yat 38 If any dispute arises as to the jurisdiction of a Gram Panchayat or
between two or more Gram Panchayats or between a Nagar
Panchayat ,1{Nagar Palika Parishad, Nagar Nigam, Cantonment Board,
Notified Area or Town Area} it shall be referred to the pres cribed
authority whose decision shall be final and shall not be questioned in
any court of law.
Custody and mode
to proof the record
in Gram Panchayat 39 Notwithstanding anything contrary to any other provisions of this
Act—
(a) all records of Gram Pa nchayat shall be in the custody of its
Pradhan . The secretary of Gram panchayat shall be liable for the
maintenance of the records, which are in t he supervision of Gram
Pradhan ;
(b) the Pradhan shall, on an application and on payment of such
fee as may be prescribed, shall give a copy of any such records and
certify it as a true copy under his signature and seal of the Gram
Panchayat.
(c) The Gram P anchayat shall be maintained such all records as
may be prescribed by the State Government from time to time.
Chapter VII
Fund, property and contracts of Gram Panchayat s
Custody or deposit
of the Gram Nidhi 40 Under the provisions of this Act as may be determined by the State
Government in case of Gram Panchayat the Gram Nidhi shall be
deposited in any such Government Treasury and sub Treasury or by
such account open in any Nationalized Bank, L ocal Bank,
Cooperative Bank and post office. The drawing and disbursing of
the fund shall be made by the Pradha n and Secretary/ Gram
Panchayat Officer by joint signat ures.
------- ------------------ ------
1- Inserted words by section 8 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

Establishment of
Land Management
Committee 41 (1) The Gram Panchayat shall a lso be the Land Management
Committee and as such discharge the duties of up -keep, protection
and supervision of all property belonging to or vested in or held by
the Gram Panchayat under section 117 of the Uttar Pradesh
Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (as applicable in
Uttrakhand State) or under any other provision s of the said Act.
(2) The Pradhan shall respectively be the Chairman of the
Land Management Committee , and the Lekhpal of the area
comprised in the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat shall be its
Secretary.
Function of the
Land Management
Committee 42 (1) The Land Management Committee shall for and on behalf
of the Gram Panchayat be charged with the general management,
preservation and cont rol of all property referred to -
(a) the settlement and management of land but not including
the transfer of any prope rty for the time being vested in the Gram
Panchayat under section 117 of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari
Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (as applicable in the
State of Uttrakhand State) or under any other provision s of the
said Act,
(b) the preservatio n, maintenance and development of forests
and trees;
(c) the maintenance and development of abadi sites and
village communications;
(d) the management of hats, bazar s and melas;
(e) the maintenance and development of fisheries and tanks;
(f) the conduct and prosecution of suits and proceedings by
or against the Gram Panchayat relating to or arising out of the
functions of Samiti ;
(g) the performance of functions specifically assigned to the
Land Management Committee under the U. P. Zamindari
Abolition a nd Land Reforms Act, 1950 1950 (as applicable in
Uttrakhand State) or any other enactment ;
(h) any other matter relating to such management,
preservation and control as may be prescribed and may exercise
all powers of the Gram Panchayat necessary for or incidental to
the discharge of such duties;
1{(i) to assist in the land holding process;}
(2) The Land Management Committee shall function subject to
the provisions of U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act.
-----------------------------
1- Inserted by section 9 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

Property vested in
Gram Panchayat 43 (1) Subject to any savings made by the State Government, all
property of the kind specified in this section and situated within the
Gram , shall vest in and belong to the Gra m Panchayat and shall with
all other property which may beco me vested in the Gram Panchayat ,
be under it direction, management and control and shall be held and
applied for the purpose of this Act, that is to say -
(a) all public buildings of every descrip tion which have been
constructed o r are maintained out of the Gram Nidhi ;
(b) all public roads, which have been constructed or are
maintained out of the Gram Nidhi and the stones and other
materials thereof and also all trees, erections, materials,
imple ments and thin gs provided for such roads;
(c) Public land and other property transferred by
Government to the Zila Panchayat, Kshe ttra Panchayat and Gram
Panchayat or transferred by gift, sale or otherwise for local public
purposes.
(d) Right to acquire land- Where a Gram Panchayat or a
number of a Gram Panchayats which have co nsolidate under the
provisions of section 42(a) or 160 require any land to carry out
any purpose of this Act, it or they shall first try to have the land
by private negotiation an d if the parties concerned fail to arrive at
an agreement, such Gram Panchayat or Gram Panchayats may
make an application in the prescribed form to the Collector to
acquire the land and the Collector may acquire such land for such
Gram Panchayat or Gram P anchayats.
(e) Disposal of claims - Where any dispute arises as regards to
the ownership of any property mentioned in section 43 between a
Gram Panchayat and any person, the Gram Panchayat shall give
such persons a reasonable opportunity of being heard and then
decide whether to treat the said property as the property of the
Gram Panchayat or not ?
Preparation and
passing of the
Budget of Gram
Panchayat 44 (1) Every Gram Panchayat shall, within such period and in
such manner as may be prescribed, prepare a statement of the
estimated receipts and expenditure of the Gram Panchayat for the
financial year commencing on the first day of April next following
which shall be passed by the Gram Panchayat by a simple majority
of the members present and voting at a m eeting of the Gram
Panchayat and the quorum for such a meeting shall be more than
half of the total number of the members of the Gram Panchayat.
(2) The responsibility of preparing budget of Gram Panchayat
shall be on the Secretary of Gram Panchayat.
(3) The Secretary shall forward the passed budget of Gram
Panchayat within five days from the date of budget pass ed by

Gram Panchayat to the approval of concerning Kshettra panchayat.
(4) The Kshettra panchayat shall return budget of Gram
panchayat up to the fixed date in original or with required
modification to the Gram Panchayat. The Gram panchayat as per
these modification with prepare budget shall forward again to the
Kshettra Panchayat within the determined time and the Kshettra
panchayat shall return t he passed budget before the determined
date to the Gram panchayat. If the Ks hettra Panchayat not approv
the bu dget of Gram Panchayat within 15 days the n the budget of
Gram Panchayat shall be deemed finall y passed .
Audit of Accounts of
the Gram Panchayat 45 (1) (a) The Audit of the accounts of the Gram Panchayat shall be
made every year in such procedure as may b e appoint by local
fund account Audit department or other authority who is
determined for this purpose by the State Government. A copy of
Audit re port shall be provided within a month after completion
of audit to the concerning Panchayat by the department.
(b) On the reciept of audit re port the Panchayat shall remove
errors and ir regulatory found in the audit and compliance report
shall forward t o the local fund account audit department or
other authority within three month s, determined for this purpose
by the State Government.
(2) The social audit of all plans conducted in the Gram Panchayats
shall also be made.
Chapter VIII
Taxation and Lev y of Fees, Cess a nd Tolls
Tax and other
source of income of
Gram Panchayat 46 For the purpose of this Act, the Gram Panchayat may impose
following tax and fees under its own jurisdiction;
(1) (a) in areas where the right, title and interest of intermedia ries
have been acquired under the Zamindari Abolition and Land
Reforms Act 1950 the Jaunsar Bawar Zamindari Abolition and
Land Refonds Act, 1956 or the Kumaun and Uttara khand
Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1960, a tax on land
not less than twen ty-five paise but not exceeding fifty paise in a
rupee on the amount of land revenue payable or deemed to be
payable therefor, Provided that where the land is in the actual
cultivation of a person other than the person by whom the land
revenue therefor is payable or deemed to be payable, the tax shall
be payable by the person in actual cultivation.
(b) areas other than those referred to in clause (a), a tax on
land revenue not less than twenty five paise but not exceeding
fifty paise in a rupee on the amo unt of land revenue payable by
a tenant, by whatever name he called, under the law in force
relating to land tenures;
-------------------------------------

Provided that where the land is in the actual cultivation of the
person other than the per son liable to pay land revenue there of, shall be
payable by the person in actual cultivation of such land.
(2) Tax on profession of other types in jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat
except Agriculture and Horticulture .
(3) fee on transfer of property under the jurisdiction of Gram Panchayat.
(4) fee on all type of purchase and sale under the jurisdiction of Gram
Panchayat in which purchese and sale of cattle’s is also include.
(5) 1{The Gram Panchayat may recover fee by making byelaws on the
following und er its jurisdiction } -
(a) fee on vehicles , which are running within the exclusive jurisdiction
of the Gram Panchayat;
(b) sanitary fee , if the Gram Panchayat made provisions for sanitary;
(c) fee on drinking water and irrigation , if the Gram Panchaya t made
provisions for drinking water and irrigation;
(d) fee on Haat market and fairs;
(6) The tax and fee may be imp osed by the tri -Panchayat on we dding points,
Mandap, resort, entertainment places as such as may be prescribed by the
State Government.
(7) The imposition of cess on sale in the shops of Government liquor
established within the limit of Gram Panchayat as may be prescribed by the
State Government.
(8) The fee imposition on sanctioning maps of building construction and
modifications as may be prescribed in the rules by the State Government.
(9) Building Tax- imposition of fixation of annual tax on the basis of total
area limit within the Gram Panchayat;
Provide d that the State Government may change, amend or rescind as
determined as per necessity.
(10) In which jurisdiction of Panchayats running work of sand, gravel etc.
mining works or functining under the three level Panchayat, the State
Government may direct under the rule for determined share of royalty to the
Panchayats.
(11) If any villagers to keep Haat market in the Gram Panchayat, then the
concerned Gram Panchayat has right to issue licence of such halt, such
provision s may be incorporated, as may be prescribed.
2{(12) In the rural areas, the animal slaughter house, me at and fish vendor
shall have to obtain a no objection certificate from Gram Panchayat before
issuance a license from the Food Safety and accordingly the Gram Panchayat
shall make provision for levying such fee, etc on it, as may be prescribed .}
--------- -----------------------

(13) The provisions may be made for surcharge on stamp duty, the
State Government may made provisions in the rules by the
consultation of the law department.
(14) The powers of imposition of tax on advertisement, holdings etc.
in the Panchayat area may be given to the concerning Panchayats.
The State Government shall determined separate jurisdiction for
Panchayats of tri levels.
(15) In case of misappropriation and encroachment of property etc.
1{under its jurisdiction }, the powers of fine and punishment may be
given to the Gram panchayats as may be prescribed.
(16) To collect rubbish, filthiness (cleaning of roads regu larly,
cleaning of filthiness every day, removal of dead cattle’s, dustbin, to
collect personal rubbish, to reach upto rubbish depot, dead body of
dustbin and cattle’s, institutional rubbish, ashes, dust the apace for
temporary collection of domestic rubbi sh and provisions relating to
pot holder) from every house and powers of solid waste management
may be given to the Gram Panchayat within his jurisdiction.
(17) if cleaning is done by the Gram Panchayat, then a tax may
impose for cleaning of private toile ts and drains which shall be
payable by the owners or occupiers of the house to which the private
toilet or drain is attached ;
(18) a tax for cleaning and lighting of streets and sanitation.
Power s to borrow 47 The Gram Panchayat may take barrow from Nabard on permission of
the State Government for employment, running cottage industry,
horticulture to the local peoples.
2{***}
Recovery of
dues of
Gram Panchayat 49 Any sum due to a Gram Panchayat under this Act or under any rule
or bye -laws made thereunder and declared by this Act or such rule or
bye-law to be recoverable in the manner provided by this chapter
shall, mutatis mutandis, be recovered as provided and prescribed as
such manner in this chapter .
---------------------
2- Omitted by section 10 of UK Act no. 12 of 2021.

Part III
Chapter IX
Establishmen t a Constitution o f Kshettra Panchayat, d isqualification
and Election
Structure and
incorporation of
Kshet tra Panchayat 50 (1) Division of rural areas into Khands - The State Government
shall by notification in the Gazette divide the rural area of each
district into Khands specifying each Khand by a name and the
limits or constituents of its area and may likewise change the
name s or make modifications in the areas and limits of the
Khands by including therein or excluding therefrom areas or
create new Khands.
(2) 1{When any area is excluded from one Khand and included in
another under sub -section (1), such area shall cease to s ubject to
the jurisdiction of the Kshettra Panchayat of the Khand from
which it has been excluded and become subject to the
jurisdiction of the Kshettra Panchayat of the khand in which it
has been included and to the rules, notifications, orders,
direction s and notices applicable thereto and the State
Government may place at the disposal of such Kshettra
Panchayat such portion of asset of the Kshettra Panchayat from
whose jurisdiction the area has been excluded as it may deem
proper and may make such tempor ary orders and direction as it
may consider necessary to effectuate the change:
Provided that where the area excluded from the one Khand
is included in a new Khand having no Kshettra Panchayat
constituted thereof, then until a Kshettra Pancha yat is
constituted for the new Khand, the Kshettra Panchayat of the
Khand from which that area has been excluded, shall continue
to exercise. Jurisdiction in that area, and anything done or any
action taken including any appointment or delegation made,
notification, order or direction issued, rule, regulation, form
bye­laws or scheme, order or direction, permit or licence
granted or registration effected under the provisions of this Act
in respect of such area by such Kshettra Panchayat, shall with
respect to the new Khand, be deemed to have been done by the
new Kshettra Panchayat under the provisions of this Act and
shall continue in force accordingly until superseded by anything
done or any action taken under this Act .}
(3) There shall be a Kshettra Panc hayat for every Khand bearing the
name of that Khand and constituted as hereinafter provided. A
Kshettra Panchayat shall consist of a Pramukh, who shall be its
presiding one Senior Up Pramukh and Junior Up Pramukh,
which shall be constituted by -
-------- ------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 11(i) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

1{(a) The elected members, who shall be elected by the direct
election from the territorial constituencies of the Panchayat area
and for this purpose the Pan chayat area shall be divided into
territorial constituencies in the following manner -
(1) There shall be 20 territorial constituencies in the development
blocks of hill area having the population upto 25000 and in the
blocks having the population more t han 25000 there shall be
gradual proportional increase in the number of the territorial
constituencies but shall not exceed 40.
(2) There shall be 20 territorial constituencies in the development
blocks of plane area having the population upto 50000 and in the
development blocks having the population more than 50000 there
shall be gradual proportional increase in the number of the
territorial constituencies but shall not exceed 40:
Provided that the proportional population of the territorial
constituencies in the blocks will be the same as far as practicable:
Provided further that a part of the territorial constituency of
the Gram Panchayat shall not be included in the territorial
constituency of any Kshettra Panchayat ; }
(b) all the Pradhans of the Gram Panchayats in the Khand;
(c) Member of State Vidhan Sabha and Lok Sabha ;
(d) the members of the Rajya Sabha who are registered as electors
within the Khand.
The member of Kshettra Panchayat mentioned in clauses (b),
(c) and (d) of sub -section (3) shall be entitled to take part in the
proceedings and vote at the meetings of the Kshettra Panchayat except
in matters of no-confidence motion against the Pramukh or the senior
Up-Pramukh or junior Up -Pramukh;
Provided that on no confidence motion of Pramuks and senior
Up Pramuk and Junior Up Pramukh of Ks hettra panchayat, the matter
shall considered only by elected member of the Kshettra Panchayat.
(4) Every elected member of the Zila Panchayat representing
constituency wh ich comprises, wholly or partly, any Kshettra
Paanchaayt, shall be entitled to take part and express his views in
the meetings of such Kshettra Panchayat as a special invitee but
shall have no right to vote in such meetings.
---------------------------
1- Substituted by section 11(ii) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(5) 1{***}
(6) Every elected member of the Zila Panchayat representing
constituency which comprises, wholly or partly, any Kshettra
Paanchaayt, shall be entitled to take part and express his views in
the meetings of such Kshettra Panchayat as a special invitee but
shall have no right to vote in such meetings.
(7) Standard for territorial constituencies of the Ks hettra
panchayat -
(a) For constitution of the Kshettra Panchayat according to t he
provisions made by the Act from time to time shall be under the
direction and final delimitation which shall be notified by the
State Government.
(b) There shall be 20 territorial constituencies in the Khand of hill
areas having the population upto 25, 000 and 20 territorial
constituencies in the Khand of planes areas having the
population more then 50,000 in the respective Khand, there
shall be gradual proportional increase in the number of the
territorial Panchayat Khand constituencies but shall not ex ceed
40;
Provided that the proportional population of the
territorial constituencies in the releted Khand will be the same
as far as practicable;
Provided further that territorial constituency of any
constitutent villa ge Panchayat in the regional election area of any
Kshettra panchayat shall not be included partially.
Constitution and
reconstitution of a
Kshettra Panchayat 51 The State Government shall arrange the constitution or the
reconstitution of the presen t area of Kshettra Panchayat in every
districts if any, thereof before the expiry of its term or when
otherwise required for the purposes of this Act .
Removal of
difficultes in the
establishment of
Panchayats 52 If, in establishing a ny Kshet tra Panchayat any d ispute or difficulty
arises regarding the interpretation of any provision s of this Act or
any rule made thereunder or any matter arising out of or relating to
such interpretation or any matter not provided in this Act, the same
shall be referred to the Sta te Government whose decision thereon
shall be final and conclusive.
---------------------------
1- Omitted by section 11(iii) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

Disqualifications for
membership of
Kshettra Panchayat 53 (1) A person shall be disqualified for being elected as and for being a
member of a Kshettra Panchayat, if he --
(a) is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being
in force for the purposes of ele ction of the State Legislature;
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground
that he is less than twenty -five years of age, if he has attained the
age of twenty -one years;
(b) he have salaried servant of Gram Panchayat / Kshettra
Panchayat / Zila Panchayat ;
(c) holds any office of profit under a State Government or t he
Central Government or a local authority or controlled by any
State Government or Central Government or any Board, bodies
or corporation owned or controlled by any State Government or
Central Government in which Aaganbadi Assistant, Attendance,
Secreta ry of Cooperative Committee and salary paid employees
and working employees on honorarium under the State and
Central sponsored schemes shall be include;
(d) has been dismissed from the service of a State
Government, the Central Government or a local autho rity for
misconduct;
(e) is in arrears of any tax, fee rate or any other dues payable
by him to the Kshettra Pa nchayat 1{Gram Panchayat or Zila
Panchayat} for such period as may be presc ribed or has inspit e of
being required to do so by Kshettra Panchayat 1{Gram Panchayat
or Zila Panchayat} , failed to deliver to it any record or property
belonging to it which had come into his possession by virtue of
his holding any office under it ;
2{(f) he is Chairman, Vice -chairman, council or, ward
member or member of a ny Municipal body };
(g) is an undischarged insolvent;
(h) has been convicted of an offence involving moral
turpitude;
(i) has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding
three months for contravention of any order made under the
Essential Commodi ties Act, 1955;

---------------------------
1- Inserted by section 12(A)(i) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(j) has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term
exceeding six months or to transportatio n for contravention of
any order made under the Essential Supplies (Temporary
Powers) Act, 1946 or the U.P. Control of Supplies (Temporary
Powers) Act, 1947;
(k) has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term
exceeding three months under the U.P. Excise A ct, 1910 (As
applicable in the State of Uttrakhand) ;
(l) has been convicted of an offence under the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985;
(m) has been convicted of an election offence ;
(n) has been convicted of an offence under the U.P.
Rem oval of Social Disabilities Act, 1947 or the Protection of
Civil Rights Act, 1955;
(o) has been removed from office under section 138 unless
such period, as has been provided in this behalf in the said
section or such lesser period as the State Government may have
ordered in a particular case has elapsed;
Provided that the disqualification under clause (e) shall
cease upon payment of arrears or delivery of the record or
property, as the case may be;
Provided further that a disqualification under an y of the
clauses referred t o in the first proviso may, in the manner
prescribed, be removed by the State Government.
(p) In place of women member/ Pramuks/ senior Pramukh/
junior Up Pramukh of Kshettra Panchayat, if her husband or
other family members or relative shall preside the meetings and
discharged the duties of Kshettra Panchayat and declared faulty
then said women and concerning person who is presiding
meetings and discharged the duties, both shall be disqualified for
forthcoming genera l election of three level of Panchayat.

--------------

1{(q) He has not passed High School or equivalent examination
from any recognized institution/ Board:
2{Provided that in the matter of General Category women ,
Other Backward Classes women and Scheduled Caste/Scheduled
Tribes candidate has not passed minimum Middle/Eight
examination; }2
(r) He has more than two living children.
3{(s) If he or his family member or his legal heir is in
unauthorized possession of Government/ Panchayat i raj land
or get benefit from such unauthorized possession }
(t) He has embezzled Government money or recovery of
government money is against him or is owed of government
money.
(u) He comes under the provisions of Section 8, Section 8A,
of the People Act, 1951. }
(2) Disqualification due to corrupt ion- An authority
competent to decide election disputes under this Act or the rules
made thereunder may declare any candidate found to have
committ ed any corrupt practice to be incapable, for any period
not exceeding five years from the date of declaration, of being
chosen as a member of a Kshettra Panchayat , or elected as a
Pramukh of a Kshettra Panchayat or of being appointed or
retained in any off ice or place in the gift or disposal of a
Kshettra Panchayat.
(3) Disqualification as for no -toilets -
(a) If any person convicted by the competent court under the
provisions of the Prohibition of Employment as Manual
Scavengers and their Rehab ilitation Act, 2013 , then he shall be
disqualified for contesting Panchayat election.
(b) If there is no toilets established in the house of
those persons residing in the jurisdiction of concerned
Panchayat, they shall be disqualified for the cand idature of the
Panchayat at election.
------------------------------------------------------

2{(4) if the entry related to any member is removed from the
territorial electoral roll or its territorial constituency is partly/
completely included in any municipal body, the member office
bearer shall remain on his office/ post till the c essation of tenure of
the concerned Panchayat. }
(5) Decision on question as to disqualification - If any question
arises as to whether a person has become subject to any
disqualification mentioned in any section of under this Act, the
question shall be refe rred to the prescribed authority for the decision
and his decision shall, subject to the result of any appeal as may be
prescribed, be final;
Provided that if the name of any person struck off from the
electoral roll of Kshettra panchayat by re ason of any such
disqualification shall forth with be reinstated in that roll, if such
disqualfication is, during the period of such electoral roll is in force,
removed under any law authorizing such removal.
(6) Prohibition of holding more than one seat simultaneously of
Panchayats - Any perso n neither be candidate in the election from
one or more territorial constituencies election areas in the Kshettra
Panchayat nor he may hold one or more post in the Kshettra
Panchayat.
1{(7) Further bar on holding tw o office simultaneously -
(1) A person shall be disqualified for holding the office of The
Pramukh, senior Up -pramukh, junior Up -Pramukh or
member of the Kshettra Panchayat, if he is -
(a) Member of the Parliament or State Legislature; or
(b) Pradhan, Up-Pradhan or Member, of any Gram Panchayat,
or
(c) The Chairman, Vice chairman or Member of any Zila
Panchayat, or

-----------------------------------------------
1- Inserted by section 10(c) of UK Act NO 10 of 2019.
2-Substituted by sec tion 12(B ) of Uttarakhand Act no 12 o 2021 .

2{(d) The Chairman or Vice -chairman or member of
committee of managment, of any co -operative society, or }
(e) The Nagar Pramukh, Up -nagar Pramukh, member,
Chairman, Vice -Chairman or member of Urban Local
Bodies, or
(f) The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or member of cantonment
board.
(2) A person, shall cease to hold the office of Pramukh, senior up pramukh, junior up -pramukh or member of the Kshettra
Panchayat, as the case of may be if subsequently he is elected to
any of the offices mentioned in clauses (a) to (f) of sub -section
(1) with effect from the date of such subsequent election and
thereafter, may be the post of Pramukh, Up -pramukh or
member, as the case may be, shall be deemed casual vacancy. }
1{Electoral roll s for
each territorial
constituency of
Kshettra Panchayat 54 (1) There shall be an electoral roll for each territorial constituency of
a Kshettra Panchayat.
(2) The electoral roll for the territorial constituency of a Kshettra
Panchayat shall consist of t he electoral rolls prepared under Section
of the Uttarakhand Panchayati Raj Act, 2016 for all territorial
constituencies of a Gram Panchayat or Gram Panchayats comprised
within the territorial constituency of the Kshettra Panchayat and it
shall not be ne cessary to prepare or revise separately the electoral
roll for any such territorial constituency of a Kshettra Panchayat;
Provided that any correction, deletion or addition made in
the electoral roll after the last date for making nominations for any
election to the Kshettra Panchayat and before the completion of that
election shall not be taken into consideration for the purposes of that
election.
(3) Save as otherwise provided by or under the various sections of
this Act, every person whose name is, for the time being, included in
the electoral roll for the territorial constituency of a Kshettra
Panchayat shall be entitled to vote at any election thereto and be
eligible for election to the membership or of any office in the
Kshettra Panchayat;
Provided that a person who has not completed the age of
twenty -one years shall not be qualified to be elected as member or
office bearer of the Kshettra Panchayat. }
---------------------------------

Chapter X
Kshettra Panchayat and its o ffice bearer and their election
Election of
Pramukh, Senior Up
Pramukh, Junior
Up pramukh 2{***}
of Kshettra
Panchayat 55 (1) Elected members of every Kshettra Panchayat shall elect a
Pram ukh and a S enior Up Pramukh and a Junior Up Pramukh from
themselves .
(2) Notwithstanding vacant any post of elected member of the
Kshettra Panchayat , the election for the office of the Pramukh and Up
Pramukh may be made;
Provided tha t the election of Pramukh, Up Pramukh shall be
made in prescribed procedure of election according the provision s
given in this Act by the elected member of the Kshettra Panchayat
from themselves ;
Provided further that for the office of the Pramukh and Up
Pramukh of the Kshettra Panchayat , the provisions of sub section (2)
shall be apply mutatis mutandis.
1{Reservation for
the post of
Pramukh of the
Kshettra
Panchayat
55-A (1) In Kshettra Panchayats, seats of Pramukh may be reserved for the
persons b elonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
the Backward Classes;
Provided that the total number of seats of Pramukh so reserved
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes or the Backward
Classes shall as nearly as may be, bea r the same proportion to the total
number of such seat as the population of the Scheduled Castes or
Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes of the State bears to the total
population of the State and such reserved seats may be allotted by
rotation to differe nt Kshettra Panchayats in such order as may be
prescribed :
Provided further that reservation for Backward Classes
shall not exceed 14 percent of tota l number of the seat of Pramukh:
3{Provided also that if the figures of pop ulation of Backward
Classes are not available, their population may be determined by
carrying out a survey in the prescribed manner }
(2) Not less than one half of the total number of reserved seats
under sub section (1) shall be reserved for th e women belonging to
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes, as
the case may be.
(3) Not less than one half seat of total number of seats of
Pramukh, under sub -section (2) shall be reserved for women and such
seats may be alloted in different Kshettra Panchayats by rotation in
such order as may be prescribed.
--------------------------------------------
1-Insertion by section 12 of UK Act no. 10 of 2019.
2- Omitted words by section 13 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(4) Reservation for seats of the Pramukh under this Section for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall not be effective at the
end of the period specified in article 334 of the Constitution of
India. }
{Explanation : Nothing in this section shall prevent the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the
Backward Classes and the women from contesting election to
unreserved places/ constituency.}
The provision s of
reservation on the
post for the
Schedul ed Caste,
Scheduled Tribes ,
Backward Classes,
Women in the
Kshettra Panchayat 56 In every Kshettra Panchayat seats shall be reserved for the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Backward Classes and the num ber of seats so reserved shall, as
nearly as may be, bear the same proportion to the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election in the Kshettra Panchayat as the
population of the Scheduled Castes in the Khand or of the Backward
Classes in the Kh and bears to the total population of such Khand
and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different territorial
constituencies in a Kshettra Panchaayt in such order as may be
prescribed ;
Provided that the reservation for the Backward Classes shall
not exceed forteen per cent of the total number of seats in the
Kshettra Panchayat;
Provided further that if the figures of population of the
Backward Classes are not available, their population may be
determined by carrying out a survey in the prescribed manner.
(a) Not less than one -half of the seats reserved shall be reserved
for the women belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and the Backward Classes, as the case may be.
(b) Not less than one -half of the total number of seats, includi ng
the number of se ats reserved shall be reserved for women and such
seats may be allotted by rotation to different territorial
constituencies in a Kshettra Panchayat in such order as may be
prescribed.
(c) The reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes shall cease to have effect on the expirat ion of the
period specified in a rticle 334 of the Constitution.
Explanation —It is clarified that nothing in this section shall
prevent the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes and the Backward Classes and the women from
contesting election to unreserved seats .
------------------------------------------
1- Inserted by section 14 (ii) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

Term of
Kshettra Panchayat
and
its Office -bearer 57 (1) Every Kshettra Panchayat shall unless sooner dissolved under
this Act, continue for five years the date appointed for its first
meeting and no longer.
(2) Amendment in any level of any law for time being in force shall
not dissolve such Kshettra panc hayat working before such
amendment unless the time as specified in sub -section (1) terminate/
finishes .
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act the term of office of a Pramukh
or Up Pramukh of a Kshettra Panchayat shall extend up to the term of the
related Panchayat.
Mode of election 58 1{The election for the post of Member of Kshettra Panchayat shall
be made by Ballot Paper or EVM through the secret ballot
procedure:
Provided that there shall be no bar on Panchayat to elect
unopposed t he office holders mentioned in this Section.}
Superintendence of
the
elections of Kshettra
Panchayat and
establishment of
State Election
Commission etc. 59 (1) The conduct, Superintendence, direction and control of the elections to
the office of Pramukh , Up-Pramukh and a Member shall be vested in
the State Election Commission.
(2) Subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the State
Election Commission, the State Election Commissioner shall
supervise and perform all functions relating to th e conduct of the
election of Pramukh, Up Pramukh and Member s.
(3) The State Government shall, in consultation with the State Election
Commission by notification, appoint the date or dates for general
election or bye -election of the Pramukh, Up -Pramukh an d Members
of a Kshettra Panchayat.
(4) For above purposes, there shall be establishment of State Election
Commission at State level.
Chapter XI
Resignat ion of office bearer, termination, fulfilment of casual
vacancies of Kshettra panchayat and internal and external control
there of.
Resignation of office
bearer s of Kshettra
Panchayat 60 (1) A Pramukh Up -Pramukh or a Member of a Kshettra Panchayat
may, by writing under his hand addressed to District Magistrate,
resign.
(2) If resigning Pramukh, Up Pr amukh or member not withdraw
his resignation within ten days then after the sanction of Zila
Magistrate the resignation by the Pramukh, Up Pramukh or
member s office shall be deemed vacant from the date of receiving
in the office of Kshettra panchayat.
----------------------------------------

Filling of casual
vacancies in
Kshettra Panchayat 61 If a vacancy occurs by reason of death or removal, resignation
or refusal or otherwise in the office of Pramukh, Up-Pramukh to
take oath of an office member of the Kshettra Panchayat, it shall be
filled from the date of such vacancy in the manner provided in this
Act, for the residue of the term of Panchayat;
Provided that if on the date of occurrence of such v acancy the
residue of the term of the Panchayat s is less than six months, the
vacancy shall not be filled up.
Arrangement in
absence of Pramukh
of Kshettra
Panchayat 62 When the Pramukh is unable to discharge his functions owing to
absence, illness or an y other cause, and the office of Up­ Pramukhs
are vacant, or when the Up -Pramukh, if, acting under the provision s
of this Act, during the vacancy in the office of Pramukh is unable to
discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause,
the prescribed authority may, by order, in written make such
arrangement, as he thinks fit, for the discharge of the functions of
the Pramukh, until the date on which the Pramukh as the case may
be resumes his duties.
Motion of no
confidence in
Pramukh, Up Pramukh, Senior Up
Pramukh and
Junior Up Pradhan
and quoram of
meeting s 63 (1) A written notice of intention to make the moti on on no
confidence in such form in Pramukh or Up Pramukh as may be
prescribed signed by at least half of the total number of elect ed
members of the Kshetttra Panchayat for the time being together with
a copy of the proposed motion, shall be delivered in person, by three
of the members signing the notice, to the Chief Development Officer
having jurisdiction over the Kshettra Panchayat .
(2) The Chief Development Officer shall thereupon: -
(a) convene a meeting of the Kshettra Panchayat for the
consideration of the motion of no confidence at the office of the
Kshettra Panchayat on a date appointed by him, which shall not
be later than thirty days from the date on which the notice under
sub-section (1) was delivered to him ; and
(b) give to the members of the Kshettra Panchayat notice
of not less than fifteen days of such meeting in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(3) Related/ Associated Chief Development officer may direct the
sub district magistrate or any district level officer to preside such
special meeting .
(4) If , within half an hour from the time appointed for the meeting
such officer/ sub -district Magistrate is not present to proceed at the
meeting, the meeting shall stand adjourned to the date and time to be
appointed by may prescribed officer.
----------------------------------------

(5) If the officer/ sub district magistrate mentioned in sub -section (4)
is unable to preside at the meeting, he may, after recording his
reasons, adjourn the meeting to such other date and time as he may
appoint, but not later than 25 days from the date appointed for the
meeting subject to sub -section (2) . He shall without del ay inform the
Chief Development O fficer in writing of the adjournment of the
meeting . The C hief D evelopment O fficer shall give to the members
at least ten days Notice of the next meeting in the manner prescribed
under sub -section (2).
(6) Save as provide d in sub -sections (4) and (5), a meeting
convened for the purpose of considering a motion under this section,
shall not be adjourned.
(7) As soon as the meeting convened under this section
commences, the Presiding Officer shall read to the motion for th e
consideration of which the meeting has been convened and declare it
to be open for debate.
(8) No debate on any motion under this section shall be adjourned.
(9) Such debate shall automatically terminate on the expiration of
two hours from the time app ointed for the commencement of the
meeting, if it is not concluded earlier, on the expiration of the said
period of two hours, whichever is earlier, the motion shall be put to
vote which shall be held in the prescribed manner by secret ballot.
(10) The pr esiding Officer shall not speak on the merits of the
motion and he shall not be entitled to vote thereon.
(11) A copy of the minutes of the meeting, together with a copy of
the motion and the result of the voting thereon, shall be forwarded
forthwith on th e termination of the meeting by the Presiding Office r
to the State Government and District Magistrate having Jurisdiction ;
(12) 1{If the motion is passed with the support of two-third of the
total number of elected members of the Kshettra Panchayat for
time being }-
(a) the Presiding Officer shall cause the fact to be published
by affixing a notice thereof on the notice board of the office of
the Kshettra Panchayat ;
(b) the Pramukh or Up -Pramukh, as the case may be, shall
cease to hold office as such and vacat e the same on and from
the date;
Provided that -
----------------------------------------------
1- Substitued by section 15 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

In computing the period of thirty days specified in this
sections, the perio d during which a. stay order, if any, issued by a
competent court on a petition filed against the motion made under
this section is in force plus such further time as may be required in
the issue of fresh notices of the meeting t o the member, shall be
excluded;
Provided further that motion of any no confidence against the
Pramukh, Up Pramukh -
(1) from resuming his office from such date within the period of
one year;
(2) from such date in which his period as the case may be
ending, within the tenure o f preceding six months;
(3) from such date in which the no confidence motion was rejected
within the period of one year shall not kept before the Kshettra
Panchayat.
Powers of State
Government in case
of default of
Kshettra Panchayat 64 (1) If at any time , upon representation made or otherwise, it appears
to the State Government that a K shettra Panchayat, or joint
Committee, or other Committee of the kshettra Panchayat has
made default in performing a duty imposed on it by or under
this or any other Act, the State Government may, by order in
writing, fix a period for the performance of that duty.
(2) If that duty is not performed with the aforesaid period so fixed,
the State Government, may appoint the District Magistrate, or
any other competent authority to perform it and may direct that
the expense, if any, of performing the duty shall be paid, within
such time as may be fixed by the District Magistrate or any
other person authorized by the State Government in this behalf,
by the Kshe ttra Panchayat .
(3) If the expense is not so paid, the District Magistrate or any,
other person authorized by the State Government in this behalf
with the previous sanction of the State Government may, make
an order directing the authority having the custody of the Gram
Nidh i, Kshettra Nidhi and Zila Nidhi to pay the expenses from
such fund.
External control
over Kshettra
Panchayat 65 In case of Kshettra Panch ayat the District Magistrate shall be
prescribed authority and such powers, duties, acts is vest in the
director Panc hayati Raj, they shall be deemed vest in the District
Magistrate in case of such Kshettra panchayat.
---------------------------------------

Chapter XII
Functions, meetings , duties, rights and administration of Kshettra
Panchayat
Meetings and
funct ion, duties,
power s and
administration of
Kshettra Panchayat 66 (1) A Kshettra Panchayat shall meet quarterly for the transaction of
business minimum four meetings.
(2) The Pramukh, in h is absence from the Up -Pramukh, may
convene a meeting of the Kshettra Panchayat whenever he thinks
fit and shall, upon a requisition made in writing by not less than
one-fifth of the members of the Kshettra Panchayat and served
on the Pramukh or Up Pramukh or sent by registered post
acknowledgment due addressed to the Kshe ttra Panchayat at it
office, must convene a meeting of the Kshettra Panchayat of the
service or receipt of such requisition.
(3) A meeting may be adjourned until the next or any subsequent
day and adjourned meeting shall be organised within one month .
(4) Every meeting shall be held at the office of the Kshettra
Panchaayt or at some other convenient place of which notice has
been duly given.
(5) The quorum for the meeting of Kshettra Panchayat shall be one
third of the 1{members}. For any adjourned mee ting the quorum
shall be one third but when, quo rum of the meeting is not
comple ted second time, then the quorum for next meeting shall
be one fifth;
Provided that for convened meeting agenda shall be as it
is;
Provided furt her that in case of necessity the special
meeting of the Kshettra panchayats may be conducted.
(2)Procedure of meetings of Panchayat s etc.- The following
matters relating to meetings of Kshettra Panchayat shall be
governed by rules -
(a) transaction of b usiness at the meeting ;
(b) quorum for transaction of business ;
(c) presiding over the meeting in the absence of Pramukh and the
Up Pramukh ;
(d) asking of questions by members;
(e) notice of meeting;
(f) maintaining of order at the meeting;
(g) d ecision by vote ;
-----------------------------------------------
1- Susb. by word of section 15 of UK Act no 10 of 2019.

(h) minute book and resolutions;
(i) right of government employes , persons authorized by the State
Government and other person s to attend and take part in
discussions ;
(j) right of Kshettra Panchayat to require attendance of employees of
the State Government to attend its meetings ;
(k) right of officers of the Kshettra Panchayat in regard to meetings ;
(l) right of the Kshet tra Panchayat to require reports, returns; etc.
from the Block Development Officer ; and
(m) other incidental matters which need or ought to be prescribed.
(3) Powers of Kshettra Panchayat to require report, etc. and right of
interpellation - The Kshet tra Panchayat may require the Pramukh
and Secretary / the Block Development Officer produce of any of
its meetings -
(a) any return, statement, estimate, statistics or other information
regarding any matter pertaining to the ad ministration of the the
Kshat tra Panchayat , as the case may be ;
(b) a report or explanation of any sub -committee; and
(c) any report, correspondence or plan or other document or a copy
thereof which is in his possession or control as Pramukh Khand
Vikas Adhikari, or which is record ed or filed in the office of the
any servant of the Kshettra Panchayat, as the case may be.
(4) Saving in respect of jurisdiction of Kshettra Panchayats - Nothing
in this Act shall confer on any Kshettra Panchayat any right in
respect of any work or inst itution carried out and maintained by
any agency not under the control of such Kshettra Panchayat,
entitle a Kshettra Panchayat to exercise within the limits of any
Nagar Mahapalika, municipality, notified area, cantonment or
town area any authority which is vested in the Nagar Mahapalika,
municipal board, notified area committee, cantonment board,
district magistrate, any other magistrate or town area committee,
as the case may be, provided that the Kshettra Panchayat may
nevertheless :
Provided that Kshettra Panchayat -
(a) construct, maintain and control within the aforesaid limits any
school, library, hospital, dispensary, poor house, asylum,
orphanage, inspection house or other building or institution which
is not maintained exclusively for the benefit of persons residing
within the aforesaid limits, and
(b) do anything within the aforesaid limits the doing of which is
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this
Act.
-----------------------------------------

Gene ral powers and
duties of the
Kshettra Panchayat 67 (1) Conferred under this Act or in relation to acts assigned him by
the State Government and with the collection of received project
from Gram Panchayat, prepare annual plan and produce before the
Zila Pan chayat;
(2) To sanction annual plan and Budget of the Gram Panchayat;
(3) To prepare Budget of Kshettra Panchayat and produced before
the Zila Panchayat;
(4) To maintain coordination with Gram panchayat and to gives
guidelines;
(5) To provide emergency hel p in the natural calamities; and
(6) To exercise powers and discharge functions assigned or
delegated to him by the State Government or Zila Panchayat.
In addit ion to the said powers and duties every Kshettra
Panchayat shall exercise its powers and f unctions within the bloc k/
Khand as refered in secion 74(a ).
Preparation of
plans by
Kshettra Panchayat 68 (1) Every Kshettra Panchayat shall prepare a development plan every
year for their own Khand including the development plan of Gram
Panchayats of Khand of Kshettra Panchayat.
(2) The plan referred to in sub -section (1) shall be prepared by the
Planning and Development Committee with the help of the
Secretary/ Khand Vikas Adhikari, in the manner prescribed and
submit it to the Kshettra Panchayat.
(3) The Secretary/Block Development Officer shall submit the plan
as approved by the Kshettra Panchayat to the Zila Panchayat before
such date as may be , prescribed .
(4) 3{***}
All officers of a
Kshettra Panchayat
to be public servants 69 Every Pramukh , Up Pramukh, and officer or servant of a
Kshettra Panchayat, shall be deemed to be a public servant within the
meaning of the 1{section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 } and in
the definition -of “legal remuneration ” in section 161 of the Code, the
word "Government" shall, for the purpos e of this section, be deemed
to include and a Kshettra Panchayat :
22{{PPrroovviiddeedd tthhaatt PPuubblliicc SSeerrvvaanntt sshhaallll bbee ddeeeemmeedd ttoo bbee aa PPuubblliicc
SSeerrvvaanntt iinn iitt’’ss KKsshheettttrraa PPaanncchhaayyaatt jjuurriissddiiccttiioonn AArreeaa..}}
Performance of
powers by the
Kshettr a Panchayat 70 Such powers, duties and functions of the Kshettra Panchayat which
shall be exercised only by Kshettra Panchayat under the provisions
of this Act, such powers and functions may be delegate by the
resolution to any Pramukh or committee by the Kshettra Panchayat .
-----------------------------------
3- Omitted by section 68 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

Duties and power s
of Pramukh of the
Kshettra Panchayat 71 (1) It shall be the duty of Pramukh unless provided otherwise by this
Act or prevented by reasonable cause -
(a) to convene and preside at all meet ings of the Kshettra
Panchayat and of such of its committees as may be prescribed in
this behalf ;
(b) otherwise to control in accordance with any regulation made
in this behalf the transaction of business at all meetings of the
Kshettra Panchayat.
(2) to watch over the financial administration and superintend the
executive administration of the Kshettra Panchayat and bring to the
notice of the Kshettra Panchayat any defect therein ;
(3) The supervision and monitoring of the work to be made
performed by the Gram Panchayat and Kshettra panchayat and to
receive detailed letters, accounts, repre sentation and copy of
instruments, copy of past resolution of Panchayat of their any
committee for this purposes.
(4) to perform such other duties as are required or imposed on him
under this Act or the rules made thereunder or any other law for the
time being in force.
(5) during a vacancy in the office of Pramukh the UP Pramukh shall
perform all function and exercise all power s of the Pramukh ;
(6) at any time perform any duty or function and exercise, when
occasion arises, any power s delegated t o him by the Pramukh and
Kshettra Panchayat.
Office of Kshettra
Panchayat 72 The Kshettra Panchayat shall have its office at such place where the
headquarter of Kshettra Panchayat is situated or as may be
determined by the State Government.
Delegation o f
powers and duties to
the Senior Up
Pramukh, Junior
Up Pramukh or
[Kshettra
Panchayat ] by the
Pramukh of
Kshettra panchayat 73 The Pramukh of Kshettra panchayat may assigned his duties and
powers to the senior Up Pramukh, Junior Up pramukh .
----------- ------------------------------------
1- Susb. by word of section 5 of UK Act no 18 of 2020 .

Committees of
Kshettra Panchayat 74 Subject to this Act, the Kshettra panchayat shall constitu te such
Committee or Committees , as may be notified by the State
Government from time to time by such mode and for the performance
of such duties, which are further mentioned, to provide such kind of
assistance in the performance of all or any functions of Kshettra
panchayat, panchayats may delegate such of its powers of functions
as it may deem fit. The Kshettra Panchayat shall have follow ing
committees, --
(A) Kshettra Panchay at- kshettra Panchayat has been constituted
shall appoint the following six committees in the manner and for
performance of duties hereinafter -
(1) Planning and development Committee ;
(2) Education C ommittee;
(3) Health and welfare C ommittee;
(4) Construction Committee;
(5) Administrative Committee
(6)Water Management and Biodiversity Management,
(B) Sub-committees -
(1) A Committee may appoint one or more sub -committees for
examination and report on any matter with which it is concerned or
for discharging any of its functions.
(2) The composition and term of a sub -committee shall be such as
may be decided by the Committee.
(3) The r eport or action of the sub -committee shall be deemed to be
the report or action of the Committee if approved by it.
(C) Subordination of committees or sub -committees -
(1) A Kshettra Panchayat may at any time call for from any of its
committees and lik ewise a committee may call for from any of its
sub-committees, a report of or extract from the proceedings of such
committee or sub -committee or as the case may be, any return.
(2) The committee or sub -committee, as the case may be, shall
with all conveni ent speed, comply with the request made under sub­
section (1).
-----------------------------------

Chapter XIII
The officers and employees of the Kshettra Panchayat and
penalties and procedure for the violation and infringement of the
provisions of the Act
officers and
employees of the
Kshettra Panchayat 75 (1) There shall be an Executive Officer of every Kshettra panchayat,
subject to the Kshettra panchayat, the Block Development Officer,
shall discharge the duties of Secretary of the Kshettra p anchayat or
as may be prescribed by the State Government .
(2) The State Government by the general or special orders according
the necessity for the every Kshettra panchayat may appoint such
other officers and employees as to duties performed under this Ac t
and the services of all officers and employees shall be deemed
assigned on such conditions as may be prescribed by the State
Government .
(3) Subject to this Act the qualifications, pay -scales, number and
conditions of service of officers and servants t o be employed with
Kshettra Panchay at to enable it to carry out functions of Kshettra
panchayat shall be such as the State Government may specify.
Powers, functions
and duties of officers
and other employees
of Kshettra
Panchayats 76 (1) The powers, fun ctions and duties of the officers and other
employees of and Kshettra Panchayats shall be such as may be
provided by or under this Act, by or under any other enactment or
by rules.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (1) heads of departments
of a Kshettra panchayat in the case of officers and other employees
working in their respective departments and the Chief Executive
Officer in the case of other officers and, employees may assign to
them powers, functions and duties and the Block Development
Officer may assign powers, duties and functions to officers and
employed with the Kshettra Panchayat of which he is the Block
Develpment Officer .
Control over the
officers and
employees of
Kshettra Panchayat 77 (1) The Pramukh shall have general control over the Block
Development officer / Secretary.
(2) All other officers and employees employed with the Kshettra
Panchayat shall work under the general control of the Block
Development Officer / Secretary.
(3) Officers and other employees of the Kshettr a Panchayat shall work
under such immediate control as the State Government may
specify .
1{(4) The transfer and recording of periodic entries in the character
book of the officers and other servants employed in the Kshettra
Panchayat and grant of casual leave to them shall be governed by
the rules made herewith by the State Government. }
---------------------------------------
1- Inserted by section 17 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

Dispute amongst
Kshettra Panchayat
and Nagar Nikay
etc. 78 If any dispute arises a s to the jurisdiction of a Kshettra Panchayat
or between two or more Kshettra Panchayats or between a Nagar
Panchayat or 1{Nagar Palika Parishad, Nagar Nigam, Canto nment
Board, notified area or town area} and th e town area or a Municipality ,
Municipal corp oration , it shall be referred to the prescribed authority
whose decision shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court
of law.
Custody and mode to
proof the record in
the Kshettra
Panchayat 79 (1) Such records who is maintained necessary in the Kshettra
panchayat as may be prescribed by the State Government from
time to time shall be maintained.
(2) Such prescribed all records by the State Government shall be
maintained in the office of with the custody of concerning
Secretary/ Block Development Officer.
(3) On application to the Secretary of Kshettra Panchayat and on
payment of prescribed fee in case of demand of any information by
any person the copy of records shall be issued by the signature of
the Secretary. The Secretary with seal shall ce rtified as a true
copy;
Provided that no records shall be maintained other than
available financial sources, amounts for the purposes of various
works by the state Government or Central Government or any
other institutions .
Chapte r XIV
Fund, Property a nd Contracts of Kshettra Panchayats
Custody and
investment of
Kshettra Nidhi
Subject to the provision s of this Act, as State Government may appoint,
Kshettra Nidhi in reference to the Kshettra Panchayat shall be
deposited in any Government Treasury or sub -treasury or such any
Nationalised Bank, Loc al Banks, Cooperative Ba nk, Post office, with
opening the Account .
Property vested in
Kshettra Panchayat 81 (1) Subject to any reservation made by the State Government , all
property of the nature specified in this section and situated within the
Khand/ district shall vest in and belong to the Kshettra Panchayat and
shall, with all other property which may become vested in the Kshettra
Panchayat, be under its direction, management and control, for the
purposes of this Act, namely -
(a) all public buildings of every description which have been
constructed or are maintained out of the Kshettra Nidhi ;
(b) all public roads which have been constructed or are maintained
out of the Kshettra N idhi and the stones and other materials thereof
and also all trees, erections materials, implements and things
provided for such roads ;
------------------------------
1- Subs . by section 18 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(c) all land and other property transferred to the Kshettra
Panchayat by Government, or by gift, sale or otherwise for local
purposes; and
(d) all tanks and wells and all adjacent lands, buildings, materials
and things connected therewith appertaining thereto within the
Khand, not bein g private property and not being maintained or
controlled by any Government or by a local a uthority other than the
Zila Panchayat.
(2) (a) Where a Kshettra Panchayat for the purpose of exercising any
power s or performing any duty conferred or imposed upon it under
this or any other enactment, desires to acquire permanently, any land
or any right in respect of land, it, may request the State Government
to acquire at, its cost the same under the provisions of the the Right to
Fair Compensation and transparenc y in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (Central Act No.30 of
2013), or of any other existing law.
(b) On the acquisition by the State Government of such land or
such right under the aforesaid provisions and on payment by the
Kshe ttra Panchayat, as the case may be, to the State Government of
the compensation awarded thereunder and of the charges incurred by
the State Government in connection with the proceedings, the land or
right, as the case may be, shall vest in the Kshettra Pan chayat, as the
case may be.
(3) (a) The management, control and administration of every public
institution maintained exclusively out of the Kshettra Nidhi shall vest
in the Kshettra Panchayat, as the case may be.
(b) Any other public institution may als o be vested in or placed
under the management, control and administration of a Kshettra
Panchayat;
Provided that the extent of the authority of the Kshettra
Panchayat in respect thereof, may be prescribed by rule.
(c) All property, endowments and funds belonging to an public
institution vesting in, or placed under, the management, control and
administration of a Kshettra Panchayat, shall be held by the Kshettra
Panchayat in trust for the purpose to which such property,
endowments and funds were law fully applicable at the time when the
institution became so vested or was so placed;
Provided that nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section
shall be held to prevent the vesting of any trust property in the
Treasurer of Charitable End owments under the Charitable
Endowments Act, 1890.
------------------------------------

Preparation and
passing the budget
of the Kshettra
Panchayat 82 (1) The Secretary of Kshettra Panchayat in help with the Planning and
Development Committee prepare before such date as is fixed by
rule in this behalf a complete account of its actual and expected
receipts and expenditure for the year ending on the 31st day of
March next, following such date, together with a budget of its
income and expenditure for the year commencing on the 1 st day
of April next following :
Provided that the grants, received from the State Government
towards works of planning and development, shall display
separately in the estimated income and it shall also be display ed in
the estimates of expenditure that how to expend such grants.
(2) The Pramukh shall send to the Zila Panchayat the account and the
budget prepared by the planning and development Committee
within seven days of their preparation and the Zila Panchaya t shall
place the account and the budget before the planning and
development committee for scrutiny and making such
recommendations as the planning and development committee
may think fit.
(3) The result of scrutiny by the Planning and development committ ee
and its recommendations shall be communicated to the Kshettra
Panchayat before such date as may be specified by rule in this
behalf.
(4) The Kshettra Panchayat shall every year at a meeting called
before a date specified by rule for the purpose discus s the acc ount
and budget prepared by the planning and development committee
and then by resolution pass the budget without any modifications
or with such modifications as it may deem fit to make.
(5) If by the date prescribed fo r the passing of the budge t, the budget
of any Kshettra Panchayat has not been passed under sub -section
(4) then the budget prepared by the planning and development
committee shall be deemed to be the budget under the
modification as recommended by planni ng and development
committe e ref erred in sub -section (3) passed as such and it shall
remain in force till the Kshettra Panchayat declares it ineffective
after passing the budget under sub -section (4).
Audit of the
Account s of the
Kshettra Panchayat 83 (1) The Audit of the account s of the Kshettra Panchayat shall be made
every year in such procedure as may be prescribed by local fund
accounts Audit department or other authority who is determined
for this purpose by the State Government. A copy of Audit report
shall be provided with in a month after completion of audit to the
concerning Panchayat by the department.
------------------------

(2) On receiv ing of audit report the [Kshettra Panchayat shall
remove errors and irregularity found in the audit ] and
compliance report shall forward to the local fund account audit
department or other authority who is determined for this purpose
by the State Government within three month .
Chapter XV
Taxation And Levy o f Fees , Cess a nd Tolls
Imposition of tax by
Kshettra Panchayat 84 A Kshettra Panchayat may, in such manner as may be prescribed,
impose —
(a) water tax, where it constructs or maintains a scheme for
providing drinking water, water for irrigation or for any other
purposes under its jurisdiction;
(b) electricity tax, wher e it provides for and maintains lighting
arrangement at a public street or other public places; and
(c) any other tax which the State Legislature has the power s under
the Constitution, including a rticle 277 thereof, to impose in the State
and of which impo sition by the Kshettra Panchayat has been
authorized by the State Government.
Recovery of
dues of
Kshettra Panchayat 85 Any sum due to a Kshettra Panchayat under this Act or under any
rule or bye -law made thereunder and declared by this Act or such rule
or bye -law to be recoverable in the manner provided by this chapter
shall, mutatis mutandis, be recovered as provided in this chapter .
Part IV
Chapter XVI
Establishment and incorporation of Zila Panchayat ,
disqualification and election
Establishment a nd
incorporation of
Zila
Panchayats 86 (1) There shall be a Zila Panchayat for each district.
(2) The Zila Panchayat shall be a corporate body. A Zi la Panchayat
shall consist of a Chairman who shall be its Presiding and a Vice
Chairman and as following -
(a) Pramukhs of all Kshettra Panchayat in the district;
(b) elect ed members, who shall be chose by direct election
from the territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area and for
this purpose the Panchayat area shall be divided into territorial
constituencies in such manner:
(i) minimum 2 territorial constituencies shall be fixed in the
development blocks of hill area having the population upto
and in the development blocks having the population
more than 24000 there shall be gradual proportional increa se in
the number of the territorial constituencies.
--------------------

(ii) minimum 2 territorial constituencies shall be fixed in the
development blocks of plane area having the population upto 50 000
and in the development blocks having the population more than
there shall be gradual proportional increase in the number of
the territorial constituencies;
Provided that as aforesaid determined the proportional
population of the t erritorial constituencies in the development blocks
shall be the same as far as practicable;
Provided further that in the territorial constituency of a Kshettra
Panchayat, shall not be include in the territorial constituency of any
Zila Panchayat ;
(c) the members of the Lok Sabha and the members of the Legislative
Assembly of the State representing constituencies which comprise
any part of the Panchayat area;
(d) the members of the council of States and the members of the
who are registered as elector wit hin the Panchayat area.
(3) Each territorial constituency referred to in clause (b) of sub -section (2 )
shall be represented by one member.
(4) The members of the Zila Panchaya t mentioned in clauses (a ), (c) and
(d) of sub -section (2 ) shall be entitled to take part in the proceedings and
vote at the meetings of the Zila Panchayat except in matters of election of
and on a motion of no -confidence against, the Chairman or the Vice
Chairman ;
Provided that on the no confiden ce motion of Chairma n and Vice
Chairman of Zila Panchayat only the elected member as mentioned in the
said sub -section (2)(b), may consider.
Effect of
changes in
districts 87 Where a n ew district is created, the Zila Panchayat having
jurisdiction in any area therei n immediately before the creation of the new
district shall continue to exercise such jurisdiction until a new Zila
Panchayat is established in that district, and on the est ablishment of a new
Zila Panchay at-
(a) all taxes fees, fines or penalties imposed or levied and all licences
Or permits granted on the date , immediately preceding the date on which
such Zila Panchayat as established by the Zila Panchayat which had
jurisdiction in the area of the new district, shall be deemed to have been
imposed, levie d or granted by the new Zila Panchayat under and in
accord ance with the provisions of thi s Act and shall, until aboli shed,
modified or changed, continue to be so realizable or effective,
----------------------------

(b) If at any time any area is n ewly included in any existing district
and on the date immediately preceding the date of such inclusion a Zila
Panchayat was exercising jurisdiction over such area the provisions of
this section shall apply as if the area newly included were a new district
and the Zila Panchayat newly constituted for the enlarged district were
the new Zila Panchayat for the purpose of this section.
Constitution and
reconstitution of
Zila Panchayats 88 The State Government shall arrange for the constitution or
reconstitu tion of the Zila Panchayat before the expiry of the term of the
existing Zila Panchayat, if any or whenever otherwise required for the
purposes of this Act.
Removal of
difficulty arises in
the establishment of
Zila Panchayat 89 If, any dispute or di fficulty arises in the establishment or in the
working of a Zila Panchayat regarding the interpretation of any
provision s of this Act or any rule made thereunder or any matter arising
out of or relating to such interpretation or any matter not provided in
this Act, the same shall be referred to the State Government whose
decision thereon shall be final and conclusive.
Disqualifications for
membership of Zila
Panchayat 90 (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as and for being a
Chairman, Vic e-chairman or member of a Zila Panchayat, if he --
(a) is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in
force for the purposes of election of the State Legislature :
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he
is less than twenty -five years of age, if he has attained the age of
twenty -one years;
(b) hold salaried service of the Gram Panchayat/ Kshettra
panchayat/ Zila Panchayat;
(c) holds any office of profit under a State Government or the
Central Government or a lo cal authority, or controlled by any State
Government or Central Government or any Board, bodies or
corporation owned or controlled by any State Government or Central
Government in which Aaganbadi Assistant, Attendance, Secretary of
Cooperative Committee and salary paid employees and working
employees on honorarium under the State and Central sponsored
schemes shall be include ;
(d) has been dismissed from the service of a State Government,
the Central Government or a local authority for misconduct;
(e) is in arrears of any tax, fee rate or any other dues payable by
him to the Zila Panchayat1{Gram Panchayat or Kshettra Panchcayt}
for such period as may be prescribed or has inspire of being required
to do so by Zila Panchayat 1{Gram Panchayat or Kshettra
Panchcayt} failed to deliver to it any record or property belonging to
it which had come into his possession by virtue of his holding any
office under it ;
--------------------------

1{(f) he is Chairman, Vice chairman, councilor, ward member or
member of any Municipal body ;}
(g) is an undischarged insolvent;
(h) has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude;
(i) has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three months
for c ontravention of any order made under the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955;
(j) has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding six
months or to transportation for contravention of any order made
under the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1 946;
(k) has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding three
months under the U.P. Excise Act, 1910 (as applicable to the
State of Uttarakhand) ;
(l) has been convicted of an offence under the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 19 85;
(m) has been convicted of an election offence ;
(n) has been convicted of an offence under the U.P. Removal of
Social Disabilities Act, 1947 or the Protection of Civil Rights
Act, 1955 (as applicable to the State of Uttarakhand) ;
(o) has been remov ed unless such period, as has been provided in that
behalf in the said section or such lesser period as the State
Government may have ordered in a particular case has elapsed;
Provided that the disqualification under clause (e) shall
cease upon payment of arrears or delivery of the record or
property, as the case may be :
Provided further that a disqualification under any of the
clauses referred t o in the first proviso may, in the manner
prescribed, be removed by the St ate Government.
(p) If in place of woma n Chairman/ Vice chairman/ Member if her
husband or other family members or relative preside the meetings
and discharged the duties of Zila Panchayat and he is convicted
than said woma n and concerning person who is presiding
meetings and discharged the duties, both shall be disqualified for
forthcoming general election of Zila Panchayat.
----------------------
1- Substituted by section 19(A)(ii) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

1{(q) He has not pa ssed High School or equivalent examination from
any recognized institution/ Board:
2{Provided that in the matter of General Category women ,
Other Backward Classes women and Scheduled Caste/Scheduled
Tribes candidate has not passed minimum Middle/ Eight
examination; }2
(r) He has more than two living children.
3{(s) If he or his family member or his legal heir is in unauthorized
possession of Government/ Panchayati raj land or get benefit from
such unauthorized possession .}
(t) He has embezzled Government money or recovery of government
money is against him or is owed of government money.
(u) He comes under the provisions of Section 8, Section 8A, Section
9, Section 9A and Section 10 of the Represent ation of the People Act,
1951. }
(2) Disqual ification due to corruption - An authority competent to
decide election disputes under this Act or the rules made thereunder
may declare any candidate found to have committed any corrupt
practice to be incapable, for any period not exceeding five years from
the date of declaration, of being chosen as or of being appointed or
retained in any office or place in the gift or disposal of a Zila
Panchayat.
(3) Disqualification of no toilets - (a) If any person is convicted by
the appropriate court under the provis ions of the Prohibition of
Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013
than he shall be disqualified to fight Panchayat election.
(b) If there is no toilet established in the house of those persons,
residing in the jurisdiction of concerned Panchayat, they shall be
disqualified for the condidature of the Panchayat election.
4{(4) if the entry related to any member is removed from the territorial
electoral roll or its territorial constituency is partly /completely
included in any mu nicipal body, the member/ office bearer of Zila
Panchayat shall remain on his office/ post till the cessation of tenure
of the concerned Panchayat .}
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1- Inserted by section 16(a) o f UK Act no. 10 of 2019.

(5) Decision on question as to disqualification - If any question ar ises
as to whether a person has become subject to any disqualification
mentioned in any section of this Act, the question shall be referred to
the prescribed authority for the decision and his decision shall, subject
to the result of any appeal as may be prescribed, be final;
Provided that if the name of any person struck off from the
electoral roll of Zila Panchayat by reason of any such disqualification
shall forthwith be reinstated in that roll, if such disqualification is,
during the pe riod such electorol roll is in force, removed under any law
authorizing such removal.
(6) Prohibition of holding more than one seat simultaneously - Any
person shall not be candidate in the election from one or more territorial
constituencies election area s in the Zila Panchayat and nor he may hold
one or more post in a Zila Panchayat.
1{(7) Further bar on holding two office simultaneously -
(1) A person shall be disqualified for holding the office of
Chairman, Vice -Chairman or member of the Zila Panchaya t, if
he is-
(a) Member of the Parliament or State Legislature; or
(b) Pradhan,Up -pradhan or Member of Gram Panchayat, or
(c) The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or Member of any Kshettra
Panchayat, or
3{(d) The Chairman or Vice -chairman or mem ber of committee
of Managment, of any co -operative society; or}
(e) The Nagar Pramukh, Up -nagar Pramukh, member, Chairman,
Vice -Chairman or member of Urban Local Bodies, or
(f) The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or member of cantonment
board.
(2) A person, if shall cease to hold t he office of Chairman, Vice Chairman, or member of the Zila Panchayat, as the case of may be
if subsequently he is elected to any of the offices mentioned in
clauses (a) to (f) of sub -section (1) with effect from the date of
such subsequent election and th ereafter, may be the post of such
Chairman, Vice -Chairman or member, as the case may be, shall be
deemed casual vacancy. }
2{Electoral roll for
each
territorial
constituency of Zila
Panchayat 91 (1) There shall be an electoral roll for each territorial c onstituency of
Zila Panchayat.

--------------------------------

(2) The electoral roll for the territorial constituency of a Zila
Panchayat shall consist of the electoral rolls for all such territorial
constituencies of a Kshettra Panchayat or Kshettra Panchayats as are
comprised within the territorial constituencies of Zila Panchayat and
it shall not be necessary to prepare or revise separately the electoral
roll for any such territorial constituency of Zila Panchayat:
Provided that any correction, addition or deletion made in
the electoral roll after the last date for making no minations for
elections to the Zila Panchayat and before the completion of that
election shall not be taken into consideration for the purpose of that
election.
(3) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Act, every person
whose name is for the time b eing, included in the electoral roll for the
territorial constituency of a Zila Panchayat shall be entitled to vote at
any election thereto and be eligible for election to the membership or
to any office in the Zila Panchayat:
Provide d that a person who has not completed the age of twenty
one year shall not be qualified to be elected as a member or office
bearer of the Zila Panchayat .
Chapter XVII
Zila Panchayat and office b earer and their election
Election of
Chairman, Vice
Chairm an 2{***} of
Zila Panchayat 92 (1) In every Zila Panchayat a Chairman and a Vice Chairman shall
be elected by the elected members of the Zila Panchayat from
amongst themselves.
(2) The election of Chairman and Vice chairman may be held
notwithstandi ng any vacancy in the office of the elected members of
the Zila Panchayat.
1{Reservation for
the post of
Chairman of the
Zila Panchayat 92-A (1) In Zila Panchayats, seats of chairman may be reserved for the
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the S cheduled Tribes and
the Backward Classes:
Provided that the number of seats of Chairman so reserved
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes or the Backward
Classes shall, as nearly as may be, bear the same proportion to the
total numbe r of seats as the population of the Scheduled Castes or
Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes of the State bears to the total
population of the State and such reserved seats may be allotted by
rotation to different Zila Panchayats in such order as may be
prescribed :
Provided further that the reservation for the Backward
Classes shall not exceed fourteen per cent of the total number of seats
of Chairman.
--------------------------------
2- Omitte d by section 20 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

1{Provided also that if the figures of population of Backward
Classes are not available, their population may be determined by
carrying out a survey in the prescribed manner .}
(2) Not less than one half of the total number of reserved seats under
the sub section (1) shall be reserved for the women belongs to
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes as
the case may be.
(3) Not less than one half seat of total number of sea ts of
Chairman, under sub -section (2), shall be reserved for women and such
seats may be allotted in different Zila Panchayats by rotation in such
order, as may be prescribed.
(4) Reservation for seats of the Chairman for Scheduled Castes
and Sc heduled Tribes under this section shall not be effective at the end
of the period specified in article 334 of the Constitution of India.
2{Explanation : Nothing in this section shall prevent the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes an d the Backward
Classes and the women from contesting election to unreserved places/
constituency.}
The provision s of
reservation on the
post for Scheduled
Caste s, Scheduled
Tribes, Backward
Classes, women in
Zila Panchayat 93 In every Zila Panchayat seat s shall be reserved for the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Backward Classes and the number of seats so reserved shall, as nearly
as may be, bear the same proportion to the total number of seats to be
filled by direc t election in the Zila Panchayat as the population of the
Scheduled Castes or of the Backward Classes bears to the total
population of such and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different territorial constituencies in a Zila Panchayat in such order as
may be prescribed ;
Provided that the reservation for the Backward Classes shall not
exceed fourteen per cent of the total number of seats in the Zila
Panchayat;
Provided further that if the figures of population of the
Backward Classes are n ot available, their population may be
determined by carrying out a survey in the prescribed manner.
(a) Not less than half of the seats reserved shall be reserved for the
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
the Backward Classe s, respectively;
(b) Not less than half of the total number of seats, including the
number of seats reserved shall be reserved for women and such seats
may be allotted by rotation to different territorial constituencies in a
Zila Panchayat in such order as may be prescribed.
-----------------------------
1- Inserted by section 21 (i) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.
2- Inst. by section 21(ii) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(c) The reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes shall cease to have effect on the expirat ion of the
period specified in a rticle 334 of the Constitution;
Further it is clarified that nothing in this section shall prevent the
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
and the Backward C lasses and the women from contesting election to
unreserved seats.
Term of Zila
Panchayat and its
Office -bearer 94 (1) Every Zila Panchayat shall unless sooner dissolved under this Act,
continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meetin g
and no longer.
(2) The term of a member of the Zila Panchayat shall, unless
otherwise determined under the provisions of this Act, expire with the
term of related Panchayat.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act the term of office of a
Chairman or Vice chairman of a Zila Panchayat shall commence upon
his election and shall extend up to the term of the Zila Panchayat .
Mode of election 95 1{The election for the post of member of Zila Panchayat shall be made
by Ballot Paper or EVM through the secret ballot procedure:
Provided that there shall be no bar on the Panchayats elect
unopposed the office holders mentioned in this Section unopposed. }
The superintendence
of election of Zila
Panchayat and
constitution of the
State Election
Commission etc . 96 (1) The Superintendence, direction and control of the conduct of the
elections to the office of Chairman, Vice chairman and a Member
shall be vested in the State Election Commission.
(2) Subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the Sta te
Election Commission, the State Election Commissioner shall
supervise and perform all functions relating to the conduct of the
election Chairman, Vice chairman and Member.
(3) The State Government shall, in consultation with the State
Election Commissi on by notification, appoint the date or dates for
general election or bye -election of the Chairman, Vice chairman
and Members of a Zila Panchayat.
(4) For above purpose there shall be establishment of State Election
Commission at State level.
------------ --------------------

Chapter XVIII
Resign, removal, fulfilment of the causal vacancies of the Zila
Panchayat officer bearers and internal and external control
Resignation of
Chairman , Vice
Chairman and
Members in case of
Zila Panchayat 97 (1) A Chairman , Vice Chairman or Member of a Zila Panchayat may
by self signature under his hand addressed to Prescribed authority,
resign.
(2) If resigning Chairman, Vice chairman or member does not
withdraw his resignation within ten days than the resignation of
Chairman, Vice chairman and member shall be sanctioned by the
State Government or Prescribed Authority . The information of such
sanctioned resignation shall be forward to the office of the Zila
Panchayat . The office of the such Chairman , Vice chairman or
members of the Zila Panchayat shall be deemed vacant from the date
of sanction ing of the resign by the State Government or prescribed
authority.
Filling of casual
vacancies in Zila
Panchayat 98 If a vac ancy occurs by reason of death or otherwise in the office
of Chairman , Vice chairman or an member of the Zila Panchayat, it
shall be filled before the expiration of a period of six months from the
date of such vacancy in the manner as the case may be, for the residue
of the term of his predecessor :
Provided that if on the date of occurrence of such vacancy the
residue of the term of the Zila Panchayat is less than six months, the
vacancy shall not be filled.
Arrangement of
Chairman of Zila
Panchaya t 99 When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to
absence, illness or any other cause, and the office of Vice chairman is
vacant, or when the Vice chairman , if any, acting under the provision s
of this Act, during a vacancy in the office of Chairman is unable to
discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause,
the State Government by order, make such arrangement , as it thinks
fit, for the discharge of the functions of the Chairman , until the date
on which the Chairman or Vice Chairman , as the case may be
resumes his duties.
Motion of no confidence in
Chairman or Vice
Chairman 100 (1) A written notice of intent on to make the motion, in such form as
may be prescribed, signed by not less than one -half of the total
number of elected members of the Zila Panchayat for the time being,
together with a copy of the proposed motion, shall be delivered in
person, by anyone of the three members of elected members signing
the notice, to the District Magistrate, prescribed autho rity having
jurisdiction over the Zila Panchayat .
(2) give to the elected members notice of not less than fifteen days of
such meeting in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The District Magistrate / Prescribed Authority shall arrange with
the District Judge of the district to preside at such meeting.
--------------------------

(4) The District Magistrate/ Prescribed authority -
(a) convene a meeting of the Zila Panchayat for the
consideration of the motion of no confidence at the office of the Zil a
Panchayat on a date appointed by him, which shall not be later than
thirty days from the date on which the notice under sub -section (1)
was delivered to him;
(b) give to the elected members notice of not less than fifteen
days of such meeting in such ma nner as may be prescribed;
Provided that the District Judge may instead of presiding
him­ self direct a civil judicial officer not below the rank of a Civil
judge subordinate to him to preside the meeting.
(5) If within half an hour from the time appointed for the meeting
such officer is net present to preside at the meeting, the meeting
shall stand adjourned to the date and time to be appointed by him
under sub -section (6).
(6) If the off icer mentioned in sub -section (3 ) is unable to preside at
the meeting, he may, after recording his reasons, adjourn the
meeting to such other date and ti me as he may appoint, but not la tter
than 25 days from the date appointed for the meeting as referred in
sub-section (2) he shall without delay inform the presid ing authority
in writing of the adjournment of the meeting. The precribed
authority shall give to the elected members at least ten days notice
of the next meeting in the manner prescribed under sub -section 4
(b).
(7) Save as provided in Sub -sections (2) an d (6) a meeting convened
for the purpose of considering a motion under this section shall not
be adjourned.
(8) As soon as the meeting convened under this section commences,
the Presiding officer shall read to the Zila Panchayat the motion for
the conside ration of which the meeting has been convened and
declare it to be open for debate.
(9) No debate on the motion under this section shall be adjourned.
(10) Such debate shall automatically terminate on the expiration of
two hours from the time appointed f or the commencement of the
meeting, if it is not concluded earlier. On the conclusion of the
debate or on the expiration of the said period of two hours,
whichever is earlier, the motion shall be put to vote which shall be
held in the prescribed manner by secret ballot.
(11) The Presiding officer shall not speak on the merits of the
motion and he shall not be entitled to vote thereon,
-------------------------------------

(12) A copy of the minutes of the meeting together with a copy of
the motion an d the result of voting thereon shall be forwarded
forthwith on the termination of the meeting by the presiding officer
to the State Government , Commissioner and to the District
Magistrate.
(13) If the motion is passed with the support of not less than two thirds of the total number of elected members of the Zila Panchayat
for the time being -
(a) the presiding officer shall cause the fact to be
published by affixing forthwith a notice thereof on the notice
board of the office of the Zila Panchayat ; and
(b) the Chairman or the Vice Chairman , as the case may
be shall cease to hold office as such and vacate the same and
from the date on which the said notice is affixed on the notice
board of the office of the Zila Panchayat;
Provided that in computin g the period of thirty days
specified in sub -section (a), the period during which a stay order, if
any, issued by a competent court on a petition filed against the
motion made under this section is in force plus such further time as
may be required in the issue of fresh notice of the meeting to the
members shall be excluded;
Provided further that motion of any no confidence against the
Chairman, Vice chairman shall not introduced -
(1) within the period of one year from such date when he join
his offi ce;
(2) within the period of preceding six months from such date
when his tenure as the case may be terminate;
(3) from such date in which the no confidence motion was rejected
within the period of one year.
Powers of State
Government in case
of default o f Zila
Panchayat 101 (1) If at any time, upon representation made or otherwise, it appears
to the State Government that a Zila Panchayat, or joint Committee,
or other Committee of the Zila Panchayat has made default in
performing a duty imposed on it by or under this or any other
enactment, the State Government may, by order in writing, fix a
period for the performance of that duty.
(2) If that duty is not performed with the period so fixed, the State
Government, may appoint the District Magistrate, or any other
competent authority to perform it and may direct that the expense, if
any, of performing the duty shall be paid, within such time as may
be fixed by the District Magistrate or any other person authorized by
the State Government in this behalf, by th e Zila Panchayat .
-----------------------------------

(3) If the expense is not so paid, the District Magistrate or any, other
person authorized by the State Government in this behalf with the
previous sanction of the State Government may, make an ord er
directing the person having the custody of the Gram Nidhi, Kshettra
Nidhi and Zila Nidhi to pay the expenses from such fund.
Consequence of
dissolution of Zila
Panchayat 102 The following consequences shall follow by the dissolution of Zila
Panchayat -:
(a) all members of the Zila Panchayat including the Chairman
shall, on a date to be specified in the order , vacate their offices as
such b ut without prejudice to their eligibility for being elected as a
member or as an Chairman under this Act.
(b) such person or persons as the State Government may
appoint in that behalf shall so long as the Zila Panchayat is not
recomputed exercise and perform, so far as may be, the powers and
duties of the Zila Panchayat and shall be deemed to be the Zila
Panc hayat for all purposes.
Chapter XIX
Meetings and f unctions, power s and administration of Zila Panchayat
Meetings of Zila
Panchayat 103 (1) (a) A Zila Panchayat shall meet for the transaction of business at
least once in every three months.
(b) The Chairman or in his absence, the Vice Chairman may
convene a meeting of the Zila Panchayat whenever he thinks fit and
shall, upon a requisition made in writing by not less than one -fifth of
the members of Zila Panchayat and served on the Chairman or sent
by registered post acknowledgment due, addressed to the Zila
Panchayat at its office, convene a meeting of the Zila Panchayat
within a period of one month from the date of the service or receipt
of such requisition.
(c) A meeting may be adjourned un til the next or any
subsequent day, and an adjourned meeting shall be conducted within
a month .
(d) Every meeting shall be held at the office of the Zila
Panchayat or at some other convenient place within the boundaries
of district of which notice has bee n duly given.
(e) The quorum for the meeting of Zila Panchayat shall be one
third of elected members. For any adjourned meeting the quorum
shall be one third but on incomplete quorum of meeting also in
second time than the quorum for next meeting shall b e one fifth;
Provided that for convened meeting agenda shall be as it is;
Provided further that is case of necessity the special meeting of
the Zila panchayats may be conducted.
-------------------------------

(2) Procedure of etc. meetings of th e Zila Panchayat -
The following matters relating to meetings of Zila Panchayat
shall be governed by rules: -
(a) transaction of business at the meeting ;
(b) quorum for transaction of business ;
(c) presiding over the meeting in the absence of Chairman
and the Vice Chairman ;
(d) asking of questions by members;
(e) notice of meeting;
(f) maintaining the order at the meeting;
(g) decision by vote ;
(h) minute book and resolutions;
(i) right of government servants, persons authorized by the
State Go vernment and other persons to attend and take part in
discussions ;
(j) right of officers of the Zila Panchayat in regard to
meetings ;
(k) right of Zila Panchayat to require attendance of servants
of the State Government to attend its meetings ;
(l) right of the Zila Panchayat to require reports, returns; etc.
from the Kshettra Panchayat Secretary, Block development
officer and chief officer ; and
(m) other incidental matters which need or ought to be
prescribed.
(3) The Zila Panchayat may require th e Chairman or the Chief
Officer may require the produce of any in its meetings -
(a) any return, statement, estimate, statistics or other
information regarding any matter pertaining to the
administration of the Zila Panchayat as the case may be ;
(b) a re port or explanation of any sub -committee; and
(c) any report, correspondence or plan or other document or
a copy thereof which is in his possession or control as Chairman ,
Kshettra Panchayat secretary, block development officer and Chief
Officer or which is recorded or filed in the office of the Zila
Panchayat or the or of any servant of the Zila Panchayat, as the case
may be.
--------------------------------

(4) Nothing in the Act, entitle a Kshettra Panchayat or Zila Panchayat
to exe rcise within the limits of any Nagar Mahapalika,
municipality, notified area, cantonment or town area any authority
which is vested in the Nagar Mahapalika, municipal board, notified
area committee, cantonment board, District Magistrate, any other
magistra te or town area committee, as the case may be, but the Zila
Panchayat may nevertheless --
(a) construct, maintain and control any school, library,
hospital, dispensary, poor house, asylum, orphanage, inspection
house or other building or institution within the aforesaid limits
which is not maintained exclusively for the benefit of persons
residing within the aforesaid limits, and
(b) do anything within the aforesaid limits the doing of which is
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under th is Act
Power s, function s
and duty of Zila
Panchayat 104 (1) To prepare annual plan and forward to the District Planning
Committee for hold district with the including of the annual planning
of Kshettra panchayat and economic development, social justice o f the
district or programs assigned to him by the State or Central
Government.
(2) To monitoring evaluation, monitoring and guiding of activities of
the Kshettra panchayat and Gram Panchayat.
(3) To passing annual plans and budget of the Kshettra panchay at.
(4) To participate in the recognized and registered institutions for the
public interest works who is operated at the level of Centre and State .
(5) to conduct and manage of symposium for empowerment from
public interest and democratic system and exh ibitions , fears, training
for Panchayat officers for strengthen to the incentive and democratic
procedures related all three levels of Panchayati Raj of the district.
(6) to provide economical and other help to any person, institutions
and committees wit hin the work area for related activities of
Panchayati Raj.
(7) to keep control on the works, administration and budget of the
Panchayat and to distribute allotted money by the Central Government
on the basis of prescribed procedure and standard to the Gr am
Panchayat, Kshettra panchayat and concerning departments.
(8) to classify fairs and festivals, other than those that are or may
hereafter be managed by the State Government as fairs, Gram
Panchayat, Ksh ettra Panchayat as Zila Panchayat fairs and festiv als
for purpose of management and control by Gram Panchayats, Kshettra
Panchayat and Zila Panchayat respectively.
---------------------------------

(9) to categorized as a Haat market of Haat of Gram Panchayat and
markets and Zila Panchayat Haat mar kets to working Haat and market
of the rural area.
(10) to categorized as a village road, inter village road and district
road respectively for the purposes of management, maintenanc e and
construction by the Gram Panchayat , Kshettra P anchayat and Zila
Panchayat.
(11) to act, subject to the rules made in this behalf, as the main
channel of correspondence between the State Government on the one
hand and the Kshettra Panchayats and Gram Panchayats on the other.
(12) to perform other duties and powers conf erred and delegated by
the provisions of this Act, and duties and powers conferred, assigned
time to time by the State Government.
Preparation of
plans by Zila
Panchayat 105 (1) A Zila Panchayat shall prepare every year a development plan for
the distric t after including the development plans of the Kshettra
Panchayats of the district.
1{(2) The plan referred in sub -section (1) shall be prepared by the
planning and development committee of the Zila Panchayat and the
Chief Executive officer shall put that plan before the remaining five
committees mentioned in section 112 of the Act, which may make
such recommendation regarding it, as it may deem proper.
(3) The Chairman shall put the plan before the Zila Panchayat with
the recommendation if any of th e five committees mentioned in sub section (2) who may approve it in such a manner as it may deem
proper and shall produce it to District Planning Committee mentioned
in article 243 Z D of the Constitution of India upto such date as may
be prescribed .}
Powers of Zila
Panchayat to make
bye-laws 106 (1) A Zila Panchayat may, and where required by the State
Government shall, make bye -laws for its own purposes and for the
purposes of 2{Kshettra Panchayats }, applicable to the whole or any
part of the rural are a of the district, consistent with this Act and with
any rule, in respect of matters required by this Act to be governed by
bye-laws and for the purposes of promoting or maintaining the health,
safety and convenience of the inhabitants of the rural area of the
district and for the furtherance of the administration of this Act in the
Khand and the district.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the power s
conferred by sub -section (1), a Zila Panchayat may, in the exercise of
the sai d power s, make any bye -laws described in the list below –
----------------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 22 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

A- Construction
(a) Declaring of any speci fic kind of alteration to be a
"material alteration" ;
(b) P rescribing that, on payment of fees in accordance with
such scale as is specified in this behalf plans and specifications
shall be obtainable from the Zila Panchayat ;
(c) F ixing with reference to the period for which a sanction
shall remain in force ;
(d) P rescribing the type and description of building which
may or may br erected and the purpose for which a building may
or may not be erected in any prescribed area or areas within a
controlled r ural area;
(e) Prescribing the circumstances in which a temple
mosque church or other sacred building may or may not be
erected, re -erected or altered in a controlled rural, area ;
(f) Prescribing with reference to the erection, re -erection or
alteratio n of buildings, or any class of buildings, all or any of the
following matters :-
(1) the materials and method of construction to be used for
external and party walls, roofs and floor;
(2) the position and, the materials to be used in and method of
constr uction of fire -places, chimneys, drains, latrines,
privies, urinals and cesspools ;
(3) the height and slope of the roof of the top floor upon which
human beings are to live or cooking operations are to be
carried on;
(4) the ventilation and space to be l eft around the building to
secure free circulation of air and to facilitate scavenging and
for prevention of fire ;
(5) the level and width of foundation, level of lowest floor and
stability of structure :
(6) the number and height of storeys constructed in the building;
(7) the means to be provided for, exit from the building in case
of fire ;
(8) any other matter affecting the ventilation or sanitation of
building ; and
(9) the conditions subject to which , sanction for the construction
or alteration of a well may be refused or granted, with a
view to prevent pollution of water or danger to any person
using the well.
(g) Regulating in any man ner not specifically provided in this
Act, the erection of any enclosure, wall, fen ce, tent, o wning, o r other

structure, of whatsoever kind of nature, on any land within a
controlled rural area.
B-Drains, latrines, pipes, cesspools, etc.
(a) Regulating in any manner not specifically provided in this
Act, the construction, alteration, maintenance, reservat ion,
cleansing and repair of drains, ventilation shafts and pipes,
water closets, privies, latrines, urinals, cesspools and other
drainage works ;
(b) regulating or prohibiting the discharge into drains, or deposit
therein, of sewage, sullage, polluted wa ter and other offensive
or obstructive matter.
C-Streets
(a) Determining the information and plans to be furnished
to the Zila Panchayat;
(b) permitting, prohibiting or regulating the use or
occupation of any or all public streets or places by it inerant
vendors by or by any person for the sale of articles, or for the
exercise of any calling or for the Betting up of any booth or stall
and providing for the levy of fees for such use or occupation;
(c) regulating the conditions on which perm ission m ay be
given by the Kshet tra Panchayat for projections over streets and
drains and by the Zila Panchayat for the temporary occupation
of streets.
D-- Markets, slaughter -houses, sale of food, etc.
(a) Prohibiting the use of any place as a slaughter -house, o r as a
market or shop for the sale of animals intended for human food
or of meat, or of fish, in default of a licence granted by the Zila
Panchayat or otherwise than in accordance with the conditions
of a licence so granted;
(b) prescribing the condition s subject to which and the
circumstances in which, and the areas or localities in, respect of
which licences for such use may be granted, refused, suspended
or withdrawn;
(c) providing for the inspection of, and regulation of the conduct
of business, in, a place used as aforesaid so as to secure
Cleanliness therein or to minim ize any injurious, offensive or
dangerous, effect arising or likely to arise therefrom;
(d) providing for the establishment, and for the regulation and
inspection of markets and slau ghter -houses, of livery stables, of
on-camping grounds, of sarais of flour -mills, of bakeries, of
places for the manufacture, preparation or sale of specified
article of food or drink, or for keeping or exhibiting animals for
sale or hire or animals of whi ch the produce is sold, and of

places of public entertainment or resort, and for the proper and
cleanly conduct of business therein; and
(e) prescribing the conditions subject to which, and the
circumstances in which, and the areas or locality in respect of
which, licences for the purposes of sub -head ( D) may be
granted, refused, suspended or withdrawn, and fixing the fees
payable for such licences, and prohibiting the establishment of
business places, mentioned in sub -head ( D) in default of licence
grante d by the Zila Panchayat or otherwise than in accordance
with the conditions of a licence so granted
E-Offensive trades
(a) Except where and so far as is inconsistent with anything
contained in the Petroleum Act, 1934 (Act no 30 of 1934) , or in
rules made t hereunder, prohibiting the use of any place, in
default of a licence granted by the Zila Panchayat or otherwise
than in accordance with the conditions of licence so granted, as a
factory or other places of business -
(i) for boiling and storing offal, bloo d, bones, guts or rags,
(ii) for the manufacture of leather or leather goods,
(iii) for melting tallow or sulphur,
(iv) for burning or baking bricks, tiles, pottery or lime,
(v) for soap -making,
(vi) for oil -boiling,
(vii) for storing hay, straw, tha tching grass, wood, coal or
other dangerously inflammable material,
(viii) for storing petroleum or any inflammable oil or spirit,
(ix) for storing and pressing cotton and cotton refuse,
(x) for any other purpose if such use is likely to Cause a
public nuisance or involve risk of fire ;
(b) prescribing (but not so as to derogate from any power s conferred
on a Zila Panchayat by sub- section (b) of section 106 the
circumstances in which and the areas or localities in respect of
which licences may be gra nted, refused, suspended or withdrawn;
and
(c) providing for the inspec tion and regulation of the con duct of
business in a place used as aforesaid, so as to secure cleanliness
therein or to min imize any injurious, offences or dangerous effect
arising or l ikely to arise therefrom.
F-Public safety and convenience
(a) Providing for the regulation or prohibition of any description of
traffic in the streets where such regulation or prohibition appears,
to the Zila Panchayat to be necessary;

(b) imposing the o bligation of taking out licences on the proprietors
or drivers of vehicles (other than motor vehicles), boats or
animals kept or plying for hire, or .on persons hiring themselves
out for the purpose of carrying loads within the limits of the rural
area of the district, and fixing the fees payable for such licences
and the conditions on which they are to be granted and may be
revoked;
(c) fixing and regulating the use of place at which boats may be
moored, loaded and unloaded, and prohibiting the mooring,
loading and Unloading of boats except at such places as may be
prescribed by the Zila Panchayat;
(d) providing for the seizure and confiscation of ownerless animals
straying within the limits of the rural area of the district ;
(e) prohibiting or regulatin g, with a view to promoting the public
safety or convenience, any act by which public nuisance arises or
is likely to arise and there is no provision s is made under this
heading for its prohibition or regulation ;
(f) promoting and regulating supply of dri nking water.
G-Sanitation and prevention of disease
(a) Controlling and regulating the use and management of
burial and burning grounds and fixing the fees to be charged
where such grounds have been provided by the Zila Panchayat,
and prescribing or prohi biting routes for the removal of corpses to
burial or burning grounds ;
(b) regulating sanitation and conservancy ;
(c) providing, in default of a bye -law not made under the
preceding sub -head, for the registration and inspection of lodging
houses, the prevention of overcrowding, prescribing the notices to
be given in the case of any infectious or contagious disease
breaking out therein and generally for the proper regulation of
lodging houses;
(d) prohibiting or regulating, with a view to sanitation o r the
prevention of disease, any act which occasions, or which is likely
to occasion, a public nuisance and for the prohibition or
regulation of which no provision s is made under this heading.
H - Miscellaneous
(a) Prohibiting or regul ating any act which occasions is likely
to occasion or is public nuisance, for the prohibition or regulation of
which no provision s is made elsewhere by, or under this Act;
(b) providing for the registration of births, deaths and
marriages, and the taking of census within the rural area and for the
compulsory supply of such information as may be necessary to

make -such registration or census effective ;
(c) for the protection from injury or interference of. anything
within the rural area being the property of Government or of the Zila
Panchayat or a Kshettra Panchayat or being under the' control of the
Zila Panchayat or a Kshettra Panchayat ;
(d) providing for the holding of fairs and industrial exhibitions
within the, rural area of the district and under the control of th e Zila
Panchayat or the Kshet tra Panchayat , and fixing the fees to be levied
thereat;
(e) requiring and regulation the appointment by owners of
buildings and lands in the rural area of the district of persons
residing within or near the said area to act as their agents for all or
any of the purposes of this act or of any rule or bye -laws;
(f) specifying the records and documents belonging to, or in the
possession of, the Zila Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat of
which inspection may be made or copies giv en and the charg es to be
levied for inspection of copies of such records and documents; and
regulating inspection and the giving of copies;
(g) providing for the granting of licences for the sale and for
the dispensing of medicinal drugs;
(h) providing fo r the registration and control of midwives / dias
publicly practicing their profession;
(i) providing for the establishment and maintenance of
maternity, centres and child welfare clinics ;
(j) providing for establishment, maintenance and grant ­in -aid
to institutions of physical culture ;
(k) regulating poor houses, orphanages, libraries, asylums,
veterinary hospitals, markets, inspection houses, public parks and
gardens and other public institutions ;
(l) regulating fairs, cattle markets, agricultural s hows and
industrial exhibitions held under the authority of a Zila Panchayat or
a Kshettra Panchayat or otherwise, to which the public is allowed
access;
(m) prohibiting the obstruction of any streams, channels, or
drains under the control of the Zila Pan chayat or a Kshettra
Panchayat and providing for the removal of any such obstruction ;
(n) for removing, demolishing, or securing dangerous
buildings, trees or places ;
(o) providing for the destruction of unclaimed, diseased or
rabid dogs and noxious an imals;
(p) prescribing conditions for the inspection of the minu te
books of the Zila Panchayat or a Kshettra Panchayat and assessment

lists of the Zila Panchayat ;
(q) prohibiting the discharge of the water of any sink, drain,
steam engine or boiler, or of any filthy, offensive or injurious matter
into any river, tank or other source of water supply, or into any
specified portion thereof ordinarily used for drinking or bathing
purposes.
Powers and Penalties in Respect of Buildings, Public Drains and
Streets, e tc.
Regulation of Building
106(b ) Definitions - For the purposes of this Chapter -
(a) "Appropriate authority" shall mean the Kshettra Panchayat
if the subject comes within the functional jurisdiction of the
Kshettra Panchayat and the Zila Panc hayat in other cases;
(b) "Kshettra Panchayat" shall, in relation to any part of the
rural area including controlled rural area, mean the Kshettra
Panchayat exercising jurisdiction in such part.
106(c) Limitation to application of certain sections of t his Chapter -
(1) Without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, the
provisions of sections 106(d), 106(e), 106(f), 106(g), 106(h), 106(i),
106(j), 106 (k), 106 (l), 106 (n), 106 (o), 106 (p), 106 (r), 106 (s), 106 (t),
106(aa),106(ab), 106(ac), 106(ad), ac106(af), 106(ag), 106(bi),
106(bn) and 106 (bp) of this Chapter shall apply only to those
portions of the rural area as have been specified by the Zila
Panchayat under this section.
(2) A Zila Panchayat may by resolution declare that the provision s of
the sections mentioned in sub -section (1) or anyone or more of them
shall apply to any portion of the rural area of the district to be
specified in the resolution and thereupon the provisions of the
sections mentioned in the resolution shall apply to the area so
specified which shall be called controlled rural area ;
Provided that public notice of the resolution has been given
to the residents of the controlled rural area in such manner as may be
prescribed by rules.
106(d) Construction or alterat ion of building after notice and according
to bye -laws -
(1) No erection or re -erection of a building or material alteration in
an existing building or making or enlarging a well within a controlled
rural area abutting on or adjacent to a public street or place or
property vested in Government or in the Zila Panchayat or Kshettra
Panchayat shall be carried out except in accordance with the
directions of any rule made by Government or bye -law made by the
Zila Panchayat and shall not be commenced unless writt en notice
thereof has been tendered to the Kshettra Panchayat not less than of

one month in advance, with such details of the proposed construction
or alteration as may be required by bye -laws to be furnished
alongwith such notice.
(2) An alteration in a building shall, ,for the purpose of this Chapter
and of any rule or bye -laws, be deemed to be material if -
(a) it affects or is likely to affect prejudicially the stability or
safety of the building or the' condition ,of the building in respect of
drainag e, ventilation, sanitation or, hygiene, or
(b) it increases or diminishes the height or area covered by or
cubical capacity of the building or reduces the cubical capacity of
any room in the building -below the minimum prescribed in any
bye-law, or
(c) it converts into a place for human habitation a building or
portion of a building originally constructed for other purposes, or
(d) it is an alteration declared by a bye -law made in this behalf
to be material alteration.
Sanction or Refusal of Work b y Kshettra Panchayat
106(e) Sanction of work by Kshettra Panchayat -
(1) Subject to the provision s of any bye -law the Kshettra Panchayat
may either refuse to sanction any work of which notice has been
given under section 1{106 (d)} or may sanction it absolu tely or
subject to -
(a) any written direction that the Kshettra Panchayat deems fit
to issue in respect of all or any of the matters mentioned in sub -head
(f) of heading ‘A' of sub -section (2) of section 106(a), or
(b) a ny written direction requiring t he set -back of the building
or part of a building to the regular line of the street, prescribed under
2{section 106(a k)} , or in default of any regular line prescribed under
that section to the line of frontage of any neighboring building or
buildings.
(2) In the case of refusal to sancti on under sub -section (1), the
Kshettra Panchayat shall communicate in writing the reasons for such
refusal to the person giving notice under section 106(d).
----------------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 2 4(i) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(3) If the Kshettra Panchayat neglect or omit for one month after the
receipt of valid notice under section 106(d) to make and deliver to the
person who has given such notice an order of the nature specified in
sub-section (1) in respect thereof, such person may by written
communication call the attention of the Kshettra Panchayat to the
omission or neglect, and, if such omission or neglect continues for a
further period of one month, the Kshettra Panchayat shall be deemed
to have sanctioned the proposed work absolutely.
106(f) Duration of sanction -
(1) A sanction given or deemed to have been given by a Kshettra
Panchayat under section 106(e) shall be av ailable for three years or
for such lesser period as may be prescribed by bye -law.
(2) After the expiry of the said period the proposed work may not be
commenced without a sanction under the foregoing section.
106(g) Inspection of work requiring sancti on- The Pramukh, the Block
Development Officer and, if authorized in this behalf by resolution of
the Kshettra Panchayat , any other member, officer or servant of the
Kshettra Panchayat may at any time and without warning inspect any
work in respect of whi ch not ice is required under section 1{106 (d)}-
(a) while under construction, or
(b) inspect within one month of the receipt of a repor t that it has
been completed or in default of such report, at any time after
completion.
106(h) Compensation for dam age sustained through order passed -
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a person g iving
notice under section 106(d ) shall not be entitled to any compensation
for damage or loss sustained by reason of an order passed by a
Kshettra Panchatyat under section 106(e) unless --
(a) the order is passed on some ground other than that the
proposed work would contravene a bye -law or be prejudicial to the
health or safety of the public or any person; or
(b) the order not provide a direction of nature or saf ety of
public or any person as specifed in clause (a); or
(c) the order not contains a direction, of the nature specified in
clause (b) of sub -section (1) of section 106(e), or
(d) the order is an order of refusal to sanction the re -erection of
a building on the ground that it is unsuitable in plan or design to
the locality or is intended for a purpose unsuitable to the locality,
or contravenes a bye -laws.
--------------------------------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 25 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

106(i) Effect of sanction under section 106(e) -
(1) A sanction given or deemed to have been given under section
106(e) shall not, beyond exempting the person to whom the sanction
is given or deemed to have been given from any penalt y or
consequence to which he would otherwise be liable under section
106(j), 106(k) or 106(a k), confer or extinguish any right or
disability or operate as an estoppels or admission or affect any title to
property or have any other legal effect whatsoever .
(2) In particular, such sanction shall not operate to relieve any person
from the obligation imposed by section 106(a a) to obtain separate
sanction for any structure referred to therein.
106(j) Illegal erection or alteration of building - Whoever beg ins,
continues or completes the erection or re -erection of, or any material
alteration in, a building or part of a building or the construction or
enlargement of a well, without giving the notice required by section
106(e) or in contravention of the provis ions of an order of the
Kshettra Panchayat refusing sanction or any written directions made
by the Zila Panchayat any bye -law, shall be liable upon conviction to
a fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
106(k) Powers of Kshettra Panchayat to stop erection and to demolish
building erected - The Zila Panchayat may at any time by written
notice direct the owner or occupier of any land to stop the erection,
re-erection or alteration of a building or part of a building or the
construction or enlargement of a well thereon in any case where the
considers that such erection, re -erection, alteration construction or
enlargement is an offence under section 106(j) and may, in like
manner direct the alteration or demolition, as it deems fit, of the
building, par t of a building or the well, as the case may be.
Public Drains
106(l) Public Drains - The Zila Panchayat may construct within the
controlled rural area such drains as it thinks necessary for keeping an
inhabited area properly cleansed and drained and may carry such
drains through, across or under any street or place, and after
reasonable notice in writing to the owner or occupier, into, through or
under any building or land;
Provided that compensation estimated in the in manner
provided by rules shall be paid to such owner or occupier.
106(m) Alteration of public drains -
(1) The Zila Panchayat may, from time to time, enlarge, lessen, alter
the course of, cover or otherwise improve a public drain and may
discontinue, close up or remove any such drain.
(2) The exercise of the power s conferred by sub -section (1) shall be
subject to the condition that the Zila Panchayat shall provide another

and equally effective drain in place of any existing drain of the use of
which any person is deprived by t he exercise of the said power s
106(n) Use of public drains by private owners -
(1) The owner or occupier of a building or land within the rural area
shall be entitled to cause his drains to empty into the drains of the
1{Kshettra Panchayat } ;
Provided that he first obtains the written permi ssion of the
Kshettra Panchayat , and that he complies with such conditions
consistent with any bye -laws which the 1{Kshettra Panchayat }
prescribes as to the mode in which, and the superintendence under
which the communications are to be made between drains not vested
in the Kshettra Panchayat and drains which are so vested.
(2) Whoever, without the written permission of the 1{Kshettra
Panchayat }or in contravention of any bye -law or of any direction or
condition made or imposed under sub -section (1), makes or causes to
be made, or alters or causes to be altered a connection of a drain
belonging to himself or to some other persons with a drain vested in
the 1{Kshettra Panchayat }, shall be liable upon convic tion to a fine
which may extend to fifty rupees, and the 1{Kshettra Panchayat }may
by written notice require such person to close, demolish, alter,
remake or otherwise deal with such connection as it deems fit.
Street Regulations
106(o ) Provision s of laying out and making a street before the
construction of build ing on a site which does not ab ut a public or
private street - Except where a site abuts a public or private street, if
any person owning or possessing any land in a controlled rural area
not thereof used for building purposes intends to utilize, sell lease or
otherwise transfer such land or any portion thereof as site for the
construction of a building he shall before utilizing, selling, leas ing or
otherwise transferring such site layout and ma ke a street which shall
connect such site with an existing public or private street.
106(p) Permission to lay out and make a street -
(1) Every person before beginning to layout or make a new private
street in a contro lled rural area shall submit a appli cation in writing to
the Kshettra Panchayat seeking permission to layout or make such
street and shall alongwith such. application submit the following
particulars :
(a) the proposed level, direction and width of the street,
(b) the street alignment and the building line, and
shall also state in the application the arrangement to be
made for levelling, paving, medaling, flagging, channeling and
draining of the street.
----------------------------------------------
1- Subsitiuted by section 26 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(2) The provisions of this Act and of any rules or bye -laws made
thereunder as to the level and width of a public street and the height
or a, building abutting thereon shall also apply to the case of a street
referred to in that s ub-section (1); and all other particulars referred to
in that sub -section shall be subject to the approval of the Kshettra
Panchayat.
(3) Within sixty days after the receipt of an application under sub section (1) the Kshettra Panchayat shall either sancti on the laying out
or the making of the street on such conditions as it may think fit to
impose or disallow it or ask for further information with respect to it
within a specified reasonable period.
(4) Such sanction may be refused if -
(i) the proposed s treet would conflict with any
arrangements which have been made or which are, in the opinion
of the Kshettra Panchayat, likely to be made for carrying out any
general scheme of street Improvement; or
(ii) the proposed street does not conform to the provi sions
of the Act, rules and bye -laws referred to in sub -section (2); or
(iii) the proposed street is not designed so as to connect at
least one end with a public street.
(iv) No persons shall layout or make any new private street
or road without, or otherw ise than in conformity with, the order of
the Zila Panchayat. If further information is asked for under sub section (3) the laying out or making of the street shall not be
commencement until orders have been passed on the application
after receipt of such information;
Provided that the passing of such orders shall not in
any case be delayed by more than thirty days after the Kshettra
Panchayat has received all the information which it considers
necessary for the final disposal of the application.
106(q) Sanction of the Zila Panchayat to be presumed for laying out and
making a street in certain case - If the Zila Panchayat neglect or
omit for sixty days after the receipt of an application under section
106(p) to grant the sanction or if an order ha s been issued under sub section (3) of the said section asking for further information fails
within a period s pecified in such order to deliver to t he person who
has submitted the application, particulars of the information required
by the Zila Panchayat s uch person may by, a written communication
call the attention to the omission, neglect or failure and if such
omission, neglect or failure continues -for a further period of thirty
days, the Zila Panchayat shall be deemed to have sanctioned the
laying out a nd making of the proposed street absolutely:
Provided that nothing contained herein shall be construed

to authorize any person to act in contravention of any provisions of
the Act or any bye -laws.
106(r) Duration of sanction -
(1) A sancti on given or deemed to have been given by the Kshettra
Panchayat under section 106(p) and 106(q) shall be valid for one
year.
(2) After the expiry of the said period the proposed street may not be
commenced without sanction under the foregoing sections.
106(s) Illegal construction of a street - Whoever begins, continues or
completes the laying out or construction of a street without giving the
notice required by section 106(p)or in contravention of any written
direction made by the Zila Panchayat under sec tion 106(q) or any
bye-law or any provision s of this Act shall be liable upon conviction
to a fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
106(t) Powers of Kshettra Panchayat to alter unsanctioned street and
demolish the same -
(1) If any person lays o ut or makes any street referred to in section
106(p) without or otherwise than in conformity with the orders of
may notwithstanding any prosecution which may have been started
against the offender under this Act, by notice in writing -
(a) require the offe nder to show sufficient cause by a written
statement signed by him and sent to the Zila Panchayat on or before
such date as may be specified in the notice, why such street should
not be altered to the satisfaction of the Kshettra Panchayat or if such
alteration be impracticable why such street should not be demolished,
or
(b) require the offender to appear before the Kshettra Panchayat
either personally or by a duly authorized agent on such day and at
such time and place as may be specified in the notice and show cause
as aforesaid.
(2) If any person on whom such notice is served fails to show
sufficient cause to the satisfaction of the Zila Panchayat than Kshettra
Panchayat may pass such order directing the alteration or demolition
of the street as it th inks fit.
106(aa) Sanction of Zila Panchayat to projections over streets and drains -
(1) Subject to any rules made by the State Government prescribing
the conditions for the sanction by a Zila Panchayat of projections
over streets or drains in a control led rural area, a Kshettra Panchayat
may give written permission, where provision s is made by a bye -law
for the giving of such permission --
(a) to the owners or occupiers of buildings in or on streets
to erect or re -erect open verandahs, balconies, or room s to
project over the street from any upper storey thereof, at such

height from the surface of the street, and to such an extent
beyond the line of the plinth or basement wall as are prescribed
in such bye -laws; and
(b) to the owner or occupier of any bui lding or land to erect
or re -erect any projection or structure so as to overhang project
into, or encroach on or over a drain in a street to such an extent,
and in accordance with such conditions, as are in like manner
prescribed.
(2) In giving permission , under clause (a) of sub -section (1) a
Kshettra Panchayat may prescribe the extent to which, and the
conditions under which any roofs, caves, weather boards, shop boards and such other like things may be allowed to project over
such streets.
106(ab) Penalty for construction of projection over streets or drains
without permission - Any person erecting or re -erecting any such
projection or structu re as is referred to in section without the
permission thereby required or in contravention of any permission
given thereunder shall be liable on conviction to a fine which may
extend to fifty rupees.
106(ac) Power s to remove encroachments and projections over streets
and drains - The Zila Panchayat may, by notice, require the owner
or occupier of a building to remove, or to alter a projection or
structure overhanging, projecting into or encroaching on a street, or
into, on or over any drain, sewer or aqueduct therein;
Provided that in the case of any such projection or
structure lawfully in e xistence on or before the commencement of
this Act the Kshettra Panchayat shall make compensation for any
damage caused by the removal or alteration, which shall not exceed
three times the cost of erection and demolition.
106(a d) Power s to require level ing, paying, etc. of streets -
(1) If in the controlled ru ral area any private street or p art thereof is
not, leveled, paved, metalled, flagged, channelled or drained to
the satisfaction of the Kshettra Panchayat, the Kshettra Panchayat
may by notice require the owners or occupiers of premises
fronting, or abutting such street or part thereof to carry out work
which in its opinion may be necessary, and within such time as
may be specified in such notice.
(2) If such work is not carried out within the time sp ecified in the
notice, the Zila Panchayat may, if it thinks fit, ex ecute it and the
expenses in curred shall be recovered from the owners or occupiers in
default under Chapter VIII according to the frontage of their
respective premises and in such proportio n as may be settled by the
Kshettra Panchayat.
(3) If any street has been leveled, paved, metalled, flagged, channeled
and drained under the provisions of the preceding sub -section, such

streets shall, on the requisition of not less than three fourths of the
owners thereof, be declared a public street.
106(a e) Power s to require the projection of streets during erection of
buildings, etc. - (1) No person shall cut down any tree or cut off a
branch of any tree, or erect or re -erect or demolish any building or
part of a building or alter or repair the outside of any building where
such action is of a nature to cause obstruction, danger or annoyance,
or risk of obstruction, danger or annoyance to any person suing a
street, without the previous permission in w riting of the Kshettra
Panchayat.
(2) The Kshettra Panchayat may at any time by notice require that
any person doing or proposing to do any of the acts referred to in
sub-section (1) shall refrain from beginning or continuing the act
unless he puts up, ma intains and provides from sunset to sunrise with
sufficient lighting such hoardings or screens as are specified or
described in the notice, and may further at any time by notice require
the removal, within a time to be specified in the notice, of any scree n
or hoarding erected in anticipation or in pursuance of any of the said
acts.
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section (1) shall be
liable on conviction to a fine which may extend to fifty rupees and to
a further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day on
which contravention continues after the date or the first conviction.
106(a f) Power s to require trimming of hedges and trees - The Zila
Panchayat may, by notice, require the owner or occupier of any land
in a controlled rural area to cut or trim the hedges growing thereon
and bordering on a street or any branches of trees growing thereon,
which overhang a street obstruct the same or cause danger.
106(a g) Power s to remove accidental obstructions - When a private house,
wall or other erection or anything fixed thereto or a tree shall fall
down and obstruct a public drain or encumber a street the Kshettra
Panchayat may remove such obstruction or encumbrance at the
expense of the owner of the same and may recover such expense in
the manner provided by Chapter VIII, or may, by notice require the
owner to remove the same within a time specified in the notice.
106(a h) Regulation of troughs and drain water pipes and drain water
pipes affecting a street - The Zila Panchayat may, by n otice, require
the owner or occupier of any building or land abutting on a street to
put up and keep in good condition proper troughs and pipes for
receiving and carrying off the water from the building or land and for
discharging the same in such manner a s the Kshettra Panchayat may
think fit, so as not to inconvenience persons passing along the street.

Public Streets
106(a i) Power s to construct, improve and provide sites on public streets -
A Zila Panchayat or a Kshettra Panchayat may --
(a) layout and make a new public street and construct tunnels
and other works subsidiary to the same ;
(b) widen, lengthen, extend, enlarge or otherwise improve any
existing public street, if vested in the Zila Panchayat or the
Kshettra Panchayat, as the case may b e;
(c) subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, turn, divert,
discontinue or close any public street so vested;
(d) provide within its discretion building sites of such
dimensions as it thinks fit to abut on or adjoin any public street
made, wide ned, lengthened" extended, enlarged or improved by it
under clauses (a), (b) and (c) or by the State Government ,
(e) subject to the provisions of any rule prescribing the
conditions on which property may be acquired by Zila Panchayat
or Kshettra panchaya t acquire by agree ment with the owner or
under the Right to Fair Compensation and transparency in Land
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (Central

the building thereon wh ich it considers necessary for the purpose
of any scheme or work undertaken or projected in exercise of the
powers conferred by the preceding clauses, and
(f) subject to the provision s of any rule prescribing the
conditions on which property vested in Zila panchayat it may be
transferred Zila Panchayat or Kshettra panchayat lease , sell or
otherwise dispose of any property acquired by under clause (e) or
any land used by it for a public street and no longer required
therefor, and in doing so impose any cond ition as to the removal of
any building existing thereon, as to the description of any new
building to be erected thereon, as to the period within which such
new building shall be completed, and as to any other matter that it
deems fit:
Provided that in undertaking work under this section
the Zila Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat as the case may be,
shall in no case interfere with or encroach upon any place of worship
or religious sanctity.
106(a j) Declaration of a street as a public street -
(1) The Zila Panchayat may at any time, and shall when required by a
requisition by public notice posted up in any street that not a public
street, or in a part of such street, give intimation of its intention to
declare the same a publ ic street, w ithin two months next after such
notice has been so posted up, the owner or owners of such street or

such part of a street, or of a greater portion thereof may lodge
objections addressed to the Kshettra Panchayat against the notice.
The Kshettr a Panchayat shall consider the objections lodged and if it
rejects them, may by further public notice posted up in such street or
such part declare the same to be a public street.
(2) Any public notice required under sub -section (1) shall, in addition
to being posted up in the street, be published in a local news paper, if
any, or in such other manner as Zila Panchayat thinks fit.
(3) The Zila Panchayat may also exercise the power s conferred by
this section in respect of a street or part of a street which it demand to
include amongst district roads.
106(a k) Power s to regulate line of buildings on public streets -
(1) Whenever the appropriate authority considers it expedient to
define general line of buildings on each or either side of any existing
or proposed public street, it shall give public notice of its intention to
do so.
(2) Every such notice specify a period in which objections shall be
received.
(3) The appropriate authority shall consider all objections received
within the specified period a nd may then pass a resolution defining
the said line, and. the line so defined shall be called the regular line
of the street :
(4) Thereafter it shall not be lawful for any person to erect, re­ erect
or alter a building or part of a building so as to proj ect beyond the
regular line of the street, unless he is authorized to do so by sanction
granted by a permission in writing and the appropriate authority is
hereby empowered to grant such permission under this section.
(5) Any owner of land who is prevented by the provisions of this
section from erecting, re -erecting or altering any building on any land
may require the appropriate authority to make compensation for any
damage which he may sustain by reason of such prevention, and
upon the payment of compensa tion in respect of any land situated
within the regular line of the street such land shall vest in the
appropriate authority.
(6) The appropriate authority may, by notice, require the alteration or
demolition of any building or part of, a building erected , re-erected or
altered in contravention of sub -section (4).
106(a l) Duties of appropriate authority when constructing public streets,
etc.-
(1) The appropriate authority shall, during the construction or repair
of a public street or of any water chann el, drain or premises vested in
it, or whenever any public street, water channel drain or premises
vested in it has, for want of repair, or otherwise become unsafe for

use by the public, take all necessary precautions against accident by -
(a) shoring up a nd protecting adjacent buildings,
(b) fixing bars, chains or posts across or in any street or the
purpose of preventing or diverting traffic during such
construction or repair, and
(c) guarding and providing with such sufficient lighting
from sunset to s unrise any work in progress.
(2) Whoever, without the authority or consent of the appropriate
authority, in any way interferes with any arrangement of construction
made by the appropriate authority under sub -section (1) or guarding
against accident shall be liable on conviction to fine which may
extend to fifty rupees or as prescribed.
Protection of sources of water supply
106(a m) Power s to require private watercourse, etc. to be cleaned or
closed - (1) The Kshettra Panchayat may and when so required by the
Kshe ttra Panchayat shall, by notice, require the owner of, or the
person having control over a private water -course, spring, tank, well
or other place, the water of which is used for drinking, to keep and
maintain the same in good condition and to clean the same, from time
to time, of silt, refuse or decaying vegetation, and may also require
him to protect the Same from pollution in such manner as the
Kshettra Panchayat may think fit.
(2) When the water of any such water -course, spring, tank, well or of
other place is proved to the satisfaction of the Zila Panchayat or the
Kshettra Panchayat , to be inappropriate for drinking, the Zila
Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat may, by notice require the
owner or person having control thereof to desist from so using such
water or permitting others to so use it, and if, after such notice, such
water is used by any person for drinking, the Zila Panchayat or the
Kshettra Panchayat, as the case may be, may, by notice, require the
owner or person having control t hereof to close such well, either
temporarily or permanently or to enclose or fence such water -course,
spring, tank, well or other place in such manner as it may direct so
that the water' thereof may not be so used.
106(a n) Emergent powers on outbreaks of epidemic - In the event of the
rural area of the district, or any part thereof, being visited with an
outbreak of cholera or other infectious disease notified in this behalf
by the State Government, the Chairman of the Zila Panchayat or
the Pramukh o f the Kshettra Panchayat, or any person authorised
any them in this behalf, may, during the continuance of the
epidemic, without notice and at any time, inspect and disinfect any
well, tank or other place from which water is, or is likely to be, taken
for the purpose of drinking, and may further take such steps as he

deems fit to preven t the removal of water therefrom .
106(a o) Removal of latrines, etc. near any source of water supply - The
Zila Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat may, by notice, require a n
owner or occupier on whose land a drain, privy, latrine, urinal,
cesspool or other receptacle for filth or refuse exists within fifty feet
of a spring, well, tank, reservoir or other source from which water is
or may be derived for public use, to remove or close the same within
one week from the service of such notice.
106(a p) Unauthorized construction, etc. over drain or water work - (1)
Where, on or after the commencement of this Act, any street has been
made or any building, wall or other structure has been erected or any
tree has been planted without the permission in writing of the Zila
Panchayat or the Kshettra panchayat as the case may be, over a
public drain or culvert or a water work vested in it, the Zila
Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat, a s the case may be, may -
(a) by notice required the person who has made the street,
erected the structure or planted the tree, or the owner or occupier
of the land on which the street has been made structure erected
or tree planted, to remove or deal in an y other way the Zila
Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat, as the case may be, thinks
fit with the street, structure or tree, or
(b) itself remove or deal in any other way it thinks fit with
the street structure or tree.
(2) Any expense incurred by the Z ila Panchayat or the Kshettra
Panchayat by action taken under clause (b) of sub -section (1) shall be
recoverable by the person by whom the street was made, structure
erected or tree planted.
Markets, slaughter houses, sale of food, etc.
106(a q) Place for slaughter of animals for sale -
(1) The Kshettra Panchayat may with the approval of the District
Magistrate, fix premises in a controlled rural area for the slaughter of
animals, o r animals of any specified description for sale, and may,
with the like approval, grant and withdraw licences for the use of
such premises.
(2) When such premises have been fixed, no person shall slaughter
any such animal for sale at any other place within a radius of two
miles from such premises.
(3) Whoever slaughter such animal at any other place within the
radius of two miles for sale , he shall be liable on conviction to a fine
which may extend to two rupees for each animal so slaughtered or as
may be prescribed .

106(a r) Power s of district magistrate in respect of ani mals not
slaughtered for sale - Whenever it appears to the District Magistrate
to be necessary for the preservation of the public peace or order, he
may, subject to the control of the Commissioner of the Division,
prohibit or regulate, by public notice, the slaughter anywhere within
the rural area of animal or animals of any specified description for
purposes other than sale and prescribe the mode and route in and by
which such animals shall be brought to and meat shall be conveyed
from the place of slaughte r.
106(a s) Improper feeding of animals kept for dairy purposes or used for
food-
Whoever in the rural area feeds or allows to be fed an animal
which is kept for dairy purposes, or may be used for food, on Filthy
or deleterious substances shal l be liable on conviction to a fine which
may extend to fifty rupees.
Explanation - Filthy or deleterious food shall mean such food
as has been specified by an authority and in the manner prescribed by
rules to be filthy or deleterious food.
106(a t) 1{Inspection of places for sale of food, drink, drugs etc .- The
Chairman, the Chief Executive Officer, the Health Officer and any
member officer or servant of Zila Panchayat authorized herewith by
resolution and similarly the Pramukh, Block Development Off icer or
any other officer of the kshettra Panchayat authorized herewith by the
Block Development Officer may, without notice at any time of day or
night enter into and inspect any such market, shop, stall or place used
for the sale of food or drink or as s laughter house or for the sale of
drugs and examine an article of food or drink or animal or drugs
which may be therein .}
106(b a) Seizure of un wholesome articles and removal of deleterious and
expired drugs -
(1) If, in the course of the inspection of a place under the precedin g
section, an article of food or drink or an animal appears to be
intended for the consumption of human being and to be inappropriate
therefor, the person inspecting, may seize and remove the same or
may cause it to be destroyed, or to be so disposed of as to prevent its
being exposed for sale or use for such consumption.
(2) If it i s reasonably suspected that a dr ug has been adulterated or by
reason of time or the effect of climate has become inert or
unwhole some, or has otherwi se become deteriorated in such manner
as to lesser its efficiency, or to change its operation, or render it
noxious, the person inspecting may remove the same, giving a receipt
therefore and may produce it before a Magistrate.
--------------------------- ---------------

(3) if it appears to a Magistrate before whom a drug has been
produced under sub -section (2) that the drug has been adulterated or
has become inert, unwholesome, or deteriorated as afor esaid, he may
order the same to be destroyed, or to b e so disposed of as to him may
deem fit, and if any offence appears to have been committed he may
proceed to take cognizance thereof.
Nuisance for certain trades and professions
106(b b) Regulation of offensive trades -
(1) If it, is shown to the satisfaction of a Zila Panchayat that any
building or place within the limits of the rural area which any person
uses or intends to use as a factory or other place of business for the
manufacture, storage, treatment or disposal of any article, by reason
of such use, or by reason of such intended use, occasions or is likely
to occasion a public nuisance, the Zila Panchayat may at its option
require by notice the owner or occupier of the building or place -
(a) to desist or refrain, as the case may be, fro m using, or
allowing to be used the building or place for such purpose, or
(b) only to use, or allow to be used, the building or place
for such purpose under such conditions or after such structural
alteratio ns as the Zila Panchayat imposes or prescribes in the
notice with the object of rendering the use of the building or
place for such purposes free from objection.
(2) Whoever, after receiving a notice given under sub -section (1)
uses or allows to be used any building or place in contravention of
the notice shall be liable on conviction to a fine which may extend to
twenty rupees or as may be prescribed and to a further fine which
may extend to five rupees for every day on which he so uses or
allows to be u sed the place or building after the date of the first
conviction or as may be prescribed.
106(b c) Neglect of the rules of the road - Whoever, in driving, leading or
propelling a vehicle along a street in the rural area, fails, except in the
case of actu al necessity -
(a) to keep to the left, or
(b) when passing a vehicle going in the same direction, to keep
to the right of that vehicle, shall be liable on conviction to a fine
which may extend to ten rupees or as may be prescribed .
Exception -- This sec tion shall nither apply to the hilly districts of
Kumaun of Uttarakhand Divisions nor where the aforesaid failure is
an offence punishable under section 1 22(2) of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1939.

106(b d) Power s to search for inflammable materials in exces s of
authorised quantity -
(1) The Kshettra Panchayat may, where it appears to be necessary for
the prevention of danger to life or property, by public notice prohibit
all persons from stocking or collecting, or stocking or collecting
beyond a specified qu antity, wood, dry grass, straw or other
inflammable materials, or from placing mats or thatched huts or
lighting fires in any house, building place or within limits specified in
the notice.
(2) Where dry wood, grass, straw or other inflammable material is
suspected to be stocked or collected in contravention of n prohibition
under sub -section (1), or in excess of the quantity permitted to be
kept in such house, building or place under the provisions of sub section (1) or of any bye -laws the any officer or servant of the Zila
Panchayat authorized by the Chief executive officer in this behalf
may, without notice and at any period of the day or night, enter into
and inspect a house or building or place.
(3) If any quantity or excess quantity of such mate rial be found it
may be seized and held subject to such order as a magistrate may
pass with respect to it.
(4) If the magistrate decides that the material seized was stored in the
house, building or place contrary to any prohibition made under sub section (1) he may pass an order confiscating the same.
(5) Subject to any provisions of or made under this or any other
enactment, the material so confiscated may be sold by order of the
Magistrate, and the proceeds, after defraying the expenses of such
sale shall be credited i n the district Fund.
106(b e) Savings in respect of other proceedings - No order of confiscation
under section 106 (b d) shall operate to prevent any other criminal or
civil proceedings to which the person storing, or collecting or storin g
or collecting the materials in excess of the permitted quantity may be
liable.
106( b f) Displacing pavements etc. -
(1) Whoever displaces, takes up or makes an alteration in or
otherwise interferes with, the pavement, gutter, flags or other
internals of a public street or the fences, walls or posts thereof, or
other such Zila Panchayat or Kshettra Panchayat property therein
without the written consent of the Zila Panchayat or the Kshettra
Panchayat, as the case may be, or other lawful authority, sha ll be
liable on conviction to a fine which may extend to one hundred
rupees or as may be prescribed .
(2) Any expense incurred by the Zila Panchayat or the Kshettra
Panchayat by reason of the doing of any suc h thing as is mentioned in
sub­section (1) may be recovered from the offender in the manner

prescribed.
106(b g) Discharging firearms, etc - Whoever discharges firearms or lets off
fireworks or fire - balloons, or engages in a game, in such a manner as
to cause, or to be likely to cause, danger to pers ons passing by feir to
damage of or dwelling or working in the neighborhood, or risk of
injury of life arises or likely to arise or property shall be liable on
conviction to a fine which my extend to twenty rupees or as may be
prescribed.
106(b h) Power s of the prevention of danger from ruinous buildings, un
protected wells, etc. -
(1) A Zila Panchayat may by notice require the owner or occupier of
any land or building -
(a) to demolish or to repair in such maner, as it deems
necessary by Zila panchay at any building, wall, bank or other
structure, or anything affixed thereto, or to remove any tree,
belonging to such owner or in the possession of such occupier,
which appears to the Zila Panchayat to be in a ruinous condition
or dangerous to persons or property, or
(b) to repair, protect or enclose, in such manner as it deems
necessary, any well, tank, reservoir, pool or excavation belonging
to such owner or in the possession of such occupier, which appears
to the Zila Panchayat for be dangerous by reas on of its situation,
want of repair or other such circumstances.
(2) Where it appears to the Zila Panchayat that immediate action is
necessary for the purpose of preventing imminent danger to any
person or property, it shall be the duty of the Zila Pancha yat itself
to take such immediate action and in such case, it shall not be
necessary for the Zila Panchayat to give notice, if it appears to the
Zila Panchayat that the object of taking such immediate action
would be defeated by the delay incurred in givi ng notice.
106(b i) Obstruction of street -
(1) Whoever without the written p ermission of the Zila Panchayat -
(a) causes or allows any vehicle, with or without an animal
harnessed thereto, to remain or stand so as to cause obstruction in
any public str eet in a controlled rural area longer than may be
necessary for loading or unloading or for taking up or setting down
passengers, or
(b) leaves or fastens any vehicles or animal so as to cause
obstruction on any such street, or
(c) exposes any article for sale, whether upon a stall or booth or
in any other manner, so as to cause obstruction in any such street, or
(d) deposits, or occasioned to be deposited any building

materials, box, bale, package or merc handize in any such street, or
(e) erects or s ets up any fence, rail, post, stall, or any
scaffolding made of cloth or wood or any other such fixture in any
such street, or
(f) in any manner wilfully obstructs or causes obstruction to the
free passage of any such street, shall be liable upon convicti on to a
fine wh ich may extend to fifty rupees or as may be prescribed.
(2) The Zila Panchayat shall have power s to remove any obstruction
referred to in sub -section (1) and the expenses of such removal shall
be recoverable from the offender in the manner provided by Chapter
VIII.
(3) The power s exercise able by a Zila Panchayat under sub-
section (2) to remove obstructions from streets, shall also be
exercisable for the removal by the Zila Panchayat of obstructions
from any open space, whether vested i n the Zila Panchayat or not,
which is not private property.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any obstruction
of a street permitted by the Zila Panchayat under any section of this
Act or any rule or bye -law made or licence granted ther eunder.
Sanitation and prevention of disease
106(b j) Toilets for factories, schools and places of public resort - The Zila
Panchayat may require by notice any person employing more than
twenty workmen or labourers or owning, managing or having contr ol
of a market, school or theatre of other place of public resort to
provide such latrines and urinals as it may deem fit, and to cause the
same to be kept in proper order and to be daily cleaned;
Provided that nothing in this section shall a pply to a factory
regulated by the Factories Act, 1948 (Act no 63 of 1948) .
106( b k) Power s to require removal of nuisance arising from tanks, etc -
The Zila Panchayat may by notice require the owner or occupier of
any land or building to cleanse, repai r, coyer, fill up or drain off a
private well, tank, reservoir, pool, depression or excavation therein
which may appear to the Zila Panchayat to be injurious to health or
offensive to the neighborhood ;
Provided that the owner or occupier m ay require the Zila
Panchayat to acquire at its expense, or otherwise provide, any land or
rights in land necessary for the purpose of effecting drainage ordered
under the foregoing provision s.
106(b l) Cleaning filthy land - If any land is in a filthy o r unwholesome state ,
the Zila Panchayat may, by notice, require the owner thereof to
cleanse, or otherwise put in a proper state, the land, and thereafter to
keep the same in a clean and proper state.

106(b m) Regulation of the disposal of rubbish, nig ht-soil, etc -
(1) The Zila Panchayat may in any controlled rural area -
(a) provide receptacles and places for the temporary deposit of
offensive matter and rubbish;
(b) appoint places for the disposal of night -soil, and other
offensive matter and rubbis h, and
(c) by public notice issue directions as to the time, manner and
conditions at, in and subject to which any offensive matter or
rubbish referred to in clauses (a) and (b) may be removed along a
street, deposited or otherwise disposed of.
(2) It s hall be sufficient notice of the appointment of a place under
clause (b) of sub -section (1) that a notice board indicating such
appointment is displayed on or near the place appointed.
106(b n) Penalty for improper disposal of rubbish, night soil, etc. - The
occupier of any building or land from which any offensive matter,
rubbish, or night soil is thrown or deposited on any part of a public
drain, or into any drain communicating with a public drain, otherwise
than in a place appointed under clause (b) or in a receptacle or place
provided under clause (a) of s ub-section (1) of section 106(b m), and
any person contravening any direction of a Zila Panchayat issued
under clause (c) of the said sub -section shall be liable, upon
conviction, to a fine not exceedi ng fifty rupees.
106(b o) Penalty for discharging sewage on public street, etc. - In specified
areas, whenever the water of a sink, sewer or cesspool, or any other
offensive matter is allowed to flow, drain or be put upon a public
street or place, or into a sewer or drain not set apart for the purpose
without the permission in writing of the Zila Panchayat or in
contravention of any condition prescribed in such permission, the
owner or occupier of the land or buildings from which such water or
offensive m atter flows, drains or is put, shall be liable upon
conviction, to a fine which may extend to fifty rupees or as may be
prescribed.
106(b p) Building fit for human habitation -
(1) In a controlled rural area, should a building, or a room in a
building, b e in the opinion of the Zila Panchayat unfit for human
habitation in consequence of the want of proper means of drainage or
ventilation or otherwise, the Zila Panchayat may, by notice, prohibit
the owner or occupier thereof from using the building or room for
human habitation or suffering it to be so used either absolutely, or
unless, within a time to be specified in the notice, he effects such
alteration therein as is prescribed in the notice,
(2) Upon failure of a person to whom notice is issued und er sub section (1) to comply therewith, it shall be lawful for the Zila

Panchayat to require by further notice the demolition of the building
or room.
106(b q) Penalty for acts done by persons suffering from certain
disorders - Whoever, while suffering fr om an infectious, contagious
or loathsome disorder -
(a) makes or offe rs for sale an article of food o r drink for
human consumption or a medicine or drug, or
(b) wilfully touches any such article, medicine or drug when
exposed for sale by others, or
(c) takes any part in the business of washing or carrying soiled
clothes, shall be liable upon conviction to a fine which may
extend to fifty rupees or as may be prescribed .
106(b r) Prohibition of cultivation, use of manure, or irrigation injurious
to healt h- If the Director of Medical and Health Services certify that
the cultivation of any description of crops or the use of any kind of
manure or the irrigation of land in any specified manner.
(a) in a place within the limits of a rural area is injurious or
facilitates practices which are injurious to the health of persons
dwelling in the neighborhood, or
(b) in a specified place within the rural area is likely to
contaminate the water supply of such specified place or otherwise
render it unfit for drinking purposes, the Zila Panchayat may by
public notice prohibit the cultivation of such crop, the use of such
manure or the use of the method of irrigation so reported to be
injurious, or impose such conditions with respect thereto as may
prevent the injury o r contamination;
Provided that when, on any land in respect of which such
notice is issued, the act prohibited has been practiced in the ordinary
course of husbandry for the last five years next preceding the date of
prohibition compensation shall be paid from the Zila Nidhi to all
persons interested therein for damage caused to them by such
prohibition.
106(b s) Power s to require owners to clear away noxious vegetation - The
Zila Panchayat may, by notice require the owner or occupier of any
land to clear away and remove any vegetation or undergrowth which
may be injurious to health or offensive to the neighborhood.
106(b t) Power s to require excavation to be filled up or dined - In a rural
area for which bye -laws have been made u nder sub -head (d) of
heading "G" of section 106 the Zila Panchayat may by notice,
require the owner or occupier of any land upon which an excavation
cesspool, tank or pit had been made in contravention of such bye laws or in breach of the condition under which per mission to dig any
such excavation, cesspool, tank or pit has been granted, to fill up or

drain the excavation, cesspool, tank or pit within a period to be
specified in such notice.
106(c a) Power s in respect of graveyard crematorium -
(1) The Zila Pan chayat may, by public notice order a graveyard
crematorium which is certified by the civil surgeon or Health officer
to be dangerous, or likely to be dangerous, to the health of persons
living in the neighborhood to be closed from a date to be specified in
the notice and shall in such case and if no suitable place for burial or
burning exists within a reasonable distance shall provide a fit place
for the said purpose.
(2) Private graveyard in such burial grounds may be exem pted from
the notice, subject to such conditions as the Zila Panchayat may
impose in this behalf :
Provided that the limits of such burial places are sufficiently
defined, and that they shall be used only for burial of members of the
family of the owners thereof.
(3) No new graveyar d crematorium whether public or private shall
be made or formed without the permission in writing of the Zila
Panchayat.
(4) No person shall, except with the permission of the Zila Panchayat
in writing, bury or burn or cause to be buried or burnt, a corp se in a
graveyard crematorium closed under sub -section (1) or made or
formed in contravention of the provision s of sub -section (3).
(5) Should a person bury or burn, or cause or permit to be buried for
burnt, a corpse contrary to the provisions of this section, he shall be
liable upon conviction to a fine which may extend to fifty rupees as
may be prescribed.
Inspection, entry, search, etc.
106(c b) Power s of inspection - The Chairman , the Chief Executive Officer
and, if authorized in this behalf b y resolution any other member,
officer or servant of the Zila Panchayat and simil arly the Pramukh,
the Khand Vika s Adhikari or any other officer of the Kshettra
Panchayat aut horised in this behalf by the Pramukh Block
Development Officer may enter into or upon a building or land with
or without assistants or workmen, in order to make an inspection or
surveyor to execute a work which the Zila Panchayat or as the case
may be, Zila Panchayat the Kshettrs Panchayat is authorized by this
Act or by rules or bye -laws, to make or execute, or which it is
necessary for the Zila Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat for any of
the purposes or in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act or of
rules or bye­ laws, to make or execute;
Provided that -
(i) except when it is in this Ac t or in rules or bye -laws other wise
expressly provided, no entry shall be made between sunset

and sunrise; and
(ii) no entry shall be made except when it is under this Act or
under rules fram there under or bye -laws other wise expressly
provided , no building which is used as a human dwelling shall
be so entered, except with the consent of the occupier thereof,
without giving previous written notice to the said occupier not
less than four hour's of such intention to make entry, and
(iii) suffici ent notice shall in every instance be given even when,
any premises may otherwise be entered without notice to
enable the inmates of an apartment appropriated for females
to remove to some part of the premises where their privacy
need not be disturbed, and
(iv) due regard shall always be paid to the social and religious
usages of the occupants of the premises entered.
106(c c) Power s of entry - It shall be lawful for a person authorized to make
an entry for the purpose of inspection, or of search, to ope n or cause
to be opened a door, gate or other barrier -
(a) if he considers the opening thereof necessary, for the purpose
of such entry, inspection or search, and
(b) if the owner or occupier is absent or being present, refuses to
open such door, gate, or barrier.
Obstruction to persons employed by Zila Panchayat or Kshettra
Panchayat
106(c d) Penalty for obstructing persons employed by Zila Panchayat or
Kshet tra Panchayat - Whoever obstructs or molests a person
employed by, or under contract with, the Zila Panchayat or a
Kshettra Panchayat under this Act in the performance of his duty or
in the fulfillment of his contract, or removes a mark set up for the
purpose of indicating any level or direction necessary to the
execution of works authorized by this Act, shall be liable to
conviction to imprisonment upto three months or fine up to fifty
rupees or both as may be prescribed.
All officers of a
Zila Panchayat
to be public
servants 107 Every Chai rman , Vice -Chairman , officer or servant of a Zila
Panchayat, shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning
of the 1{section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 }, and in the
definition of legal remuneration in section 161 of the Code, the word
"Government" shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed to
include Zila Panchayat :
2{PPrroovviiddeedd tthhaatt PPuubblliicc SSeerrvvaanntt sshhaallll bbee ddeeeemmeedd ttoo bbee aa PPuubblliicc
SSeerrvvaanntt iinn iitt’’ss ZZiillaa PPaanncchhaayyaatt jjuurriissddiiccttiioonn AArreeaa..}}
-----------------------

Exercise and
performance of
powers by the Zila
Panchayat 108 Except such any powers and functions which are exercised and
performed only by Zila Panchayat and reserve for Chairman such
all or any powers and functions which are conferred by this Act to
him and made provisions for that purpose than by passing speci al
motion may be delegate to any Committee.
Duties and power s
of Chairman of the
Zila Panchayat 109 A (1) It shall be the duty of Chairman unless provided otherwise
by this Act or prevented by reasonable cause -
(i) to convene and preside at all meetings of the Zila
Panchayat and of such of its committees as may be prescribed
in this behalf ;
(ii) otherwise to control in accordance with any regulation
made in this behal f the transaction of business at, all meetings
of the Zila Panchayat ;
(2) to watch over the financial administration and superintend the
executive administration of the Zila Panchayat, and bring to
the attention of the Zila Panchayat if any, defect ther ein;
(3) shall supervise and control the head of the departments and
other employees of the Zila Panchayat through the Chief
Executive Officer ;
(4) shall supervise and in spect of the works of the Gram
Panchayat, Kshettra Panchaya t or Zila Panchayat an d receive
copies of the detail letters, accounts, representation and
instruments for this purpose;
(5) to perform such other duties as are required of or imposed on
him under this Act or the rules made thereunder of any other
law for the time being in for ce.
B (1) In case of any kind of vacancy of the Chairman perform all
such powers and functions exercise by the Chairman which
are mentioned in section 108.
(2) To exercise and performed such powers and functions
provided to the Vice Chairman by Chairman o r Zila
Panchayat.
Office of Zila
Panchayat s 110 The headquarter of Zila Panchayat shall be at such place where the
headquarter of Zila Panchayat is situated or the State Government
prescribed.
Delegation of
powers and duties to
Vice chairman or
Panchaya ts by
Chairman of Zila
Panchayat 111 The Chairman may delegate his own duties and power s to Vice Chairman of Zila Panchayat .
--------------------------

Committees in Zila
Panchayats 112 Subject to this Act, t he Zila Panchayat shall constitute such
comm ittee or committees as may be notified by the State
Government from time to time, to assist the Zila Panchayat in the
performance of all or any of its functions by such meth od and for the
performance of such duties which are further provided and may
delega te such of its powers or functions as it may deem fit. There
shall be following committees for Zila Panchayat -
(A) for the performance of duties in Zila Panchayat shall constitute
of six committees which shall be as follows -
(1) Planning and Develo pment Committee (2) Education Committee
(3) Health and Welfare Committee (4) Construction Committee (5)
Administrative Committee (6) Water Management and Biodiversity
Management Committee.
The Chairman, Vice chairman and member of members in above
said committees shall be that as may be prescribed.
(B) (1) A Committee may appoint one or more sub -committees for
examination and report on any matter with which it is concerned or
for discharging any of functions.
(2) The composition and term of a s ub-committee shall be such
as may be decided by the Committee.
(3) The report or action of the sub -committee shall be deemed to
be the report or action of the Committee if approved by it.
(C) (1) A Zila Panchayat may at any time call for from any of its
committees and likewise a committee may call for from any of its
sub-committees, a report of or extract from the proceedings of such
committee or sub -committee or as the case may be, any return.
(2) The committee or sub -committee, as the case may b e, shall with
all convenient speed, comply with the request made under sub­
section (1).
Chapter XX
The officers and employees of the Zila Panchayat and penalties and
procedure of violation and infringement of the provisions of the Act
Officers and
Emp loyees of
the Zila
Panchayat 113 (1) Every Zila Panchayat shall have a Chief Executive Officer who
shall be appointed for the purpose to perform the functions of
Zila Panchayat under this Act by the State Government.
(2) For the performance of functi ons of the Zila Panchayat the
following posts of the other officers and employees in the Zila
Panchayat -
(i) Additional Chief O fficer;
(ii) Finance O fficer;
(iii) Executive O fficer ;
(iv) Engineer;
(v) Tax O fficer;

(vi) Junior Engineer;
(vii) District lev el officers of the all concerning department the
subject elaborated in 11th Schdule of the Constitution.
(3) The State Government may appoint the employees under the Zila
panchayat, who are working in relation to the activities of State, by
such disignatio n as may be specified in order, for the Zila panchayat,
as it may deem fit .
(4) (a) The qualifications of persons to be appointed to the posts of
Finance Officer, Executive Officer, Engineer, Junior
Engineer , and Tax offi cer created under sub -section (2 ) of
(b) The emoluments and other conditions of service of officers and
other servants of the Zila Panchayat shall be such as may be
prescribed
(5) (i) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, th e State Government
may-
(a) at the request of the Zila Panchayat and for such time
and on such terms as may be agreed to place at the disposal of
the Zila Panchayat the services of any of its servants; and
(b) whenever the work of any Government office i s
transferred to a Zila Panchayat , by order in writing require the
Zila Panchayat to employ on such posts and on such terms as
may be specified in the order either the entire staff of the office
of Government connected with that work or such of the servan ts
in that office as may be designated or nominated by the State
Government and the services of such staff or servants shall
thereupon be deemed to have been placed at the disposal of the
Zila Panchayat for the time being ;
Provided that a servant s o employed with a Zila
Panchayat may at any time be recalled by the State Government.
(ii) The salaries and allowances of servants referred to in sub­section
(1) shall be paid out of the Zila Nidhi as if they were servants of
the Zila Panchayat.
(6) T he Finance Officer of the Zila Panchayat shall be appointed by
the State Government in the manner provided by rules.
(7) (i) Appointments to the posts of Executive Officer, Engineer,
Junior Engineer and Tax officer carrying such pay scales as the
State Gov ernment may, by notification, fix shall be made by the
Zila Panchayat in consultation with the State Public Service
Commission or such other Commission or Selection Board as may
be constituted by the State Government in this behalf for all Zila
Panchayats or any groups of Zila Panchayat s separately (in either
case here­after referred to as the Commission) in the manner
prescribed ;

Provided that if there is a difference of opinion between the
Commission and the Zila Panchayat the matter shall be refe rred to the
State Government whose decision shall be final and binding .
(ii) Except in the case of such other class of posts which the State
Government may specify, appointments to posts connected with any
department of the Zila Panchayats specified by ru les carrying such
pay scales as the State Government may, by notification, fix shall be
made by the Chief Officer .
(iii) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, appointments to posts
under the Zila Panchayat , other than those covered by sub -sections
(i) and (ii ), shall be made by the Chairman ---
(a) in the case of others, on the advice of the election
committee by Chairman ;
Provided that if in any case the Chairman is of opinion
that the advice of the election committee is improper or unfair , he
may make a reference to the Commissioner of the Division whose
decision in the matter shall be final and binding.
(iv) Notwithstanding anything in the preceding sub -section­ --
(a) if the State Government has made any order under
sub­section (2) of se ction 113 , that order would prevail, and
(b) the State Government may at any time require a Zila
Panchayat to take in its own service any such Government
servant whose services have been placed at the disposal of the
Zila Panchayat under of sub -section (2 ) of section 113 and who
has given has consent in that behalf and upon being so taken in
the service of the Zila Panchayat such servant shall cease to be
Government servant and shall become a servant of the Zila
Panchayat .
(8) The State Government may cr eate or abolish any post of officer
except mentioned posts in sub section (1).
(9) (i) Where an authority specified in sub section (2) of section 113 ,
fails within a reasonable time to make an appointment to a post
created thereunder, whether in the manne r provided or in
pursuance of an order, the State Government may, after giving
such authority a reasonable opportunity to make the appointment
and consulting the Commission, if necessary make appointment
thereto and such appointment shall be deemed to have been made
in accordance with this Act.
(ii) Where Zila Panchayat fails to provide s taff under sub -section (2 )
of section 113, to any Kshettra Panchayat the State Government
may provide such staff out of the staff of the Zila Panchayat and
such staff shal l be deemed to have been placed on deputation with
the Kshettra Panchayat under the said sub -section.
-----------------------------------

Central transferable
cadre
of certain
classes of
employees of Zila
Panchayat 114 (A) The State Government may at any time create a central
transferable cadre of executives , engineers , finance officers and
other officers and where any such cadre has been created,
appointment to the posts of executives , engineers , finance officers or
other officers aforesaid, as the c ase may be, shall be made out of the
persons of the cadre concerned in such manner and on such terms as
may be prescribed by rules, and notwithstanding anything elsewhere
in this Act, selection of persons to any such cadre and the transfer
and punishment o f officers of the cadre shall be regulated by rules.
(B) (1) Notwithstanding anything in sections 113(2) officiating and
temporary appointments to posts mentioned may be made by the
appointing authority specified or in the rules without consulting the
Comm ission, but no such appointment shall, except as provided in
sub-section (2), continue beyond a period of one year save after
consultation with the commission.
(2) The appointments made under sub -section (1) may, in
special circumstances and where the appo inting authority is the Zila
Panchayat, with the approval of the State Government be continued
without consulting the commission for a period not exceeding two
years.
(C) The punishment of officers and other servants employed with
the Zila Panchayat or w ith any Kshettra Panchayat including
appeals from orders or punishment, the power s of revision, if any, of
appellate orders and suspension pending enquiry shall be regulated
by rules;
Provided that the authority which is given the power s to
dismiss remove from service or reduce in rank any officer or servant
shall not be lower in rank than the appointing authority for the post
held by such officer or servant;
Provided also that in the case of employees whose
appointment is required to be made in consultation with the State
Public Service Commission, it shall be necessary for the punishing
authority to consult the Commission in the manner prescribed before
passing an order for the dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of
any such employee.
Powers, functions
and duties of officers
and other servants
of Zila Panchayats 115 (1) The powers, functions and duties of the officers and other
employees of Zila Panchayats shall be such as may be provided by
or under this Act, by or under any other en actment and by rules.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (1) heads of
departments of a Zila Panchayat in the case of officers and other
servants working in their respective departments and the Chief
Officer in the case of other officers and, employes may assign to
them powers, functions and duties .
------------------------

Control over the
officers and servants
of Zila Panchayat 116 (1) (a) The Zila Panchayat shall exercise such control over the
Chief Officer and other Heads of Departments as may be prescribed
and the Chairman shall have a right to send every year his
assessment of the work and conduct of the Chief officer to the
authority which is required to record periodical entries about the
work and conduct of the Mukhya Adhikari as a Go vernment
servant.
(b) The authority aforesaid shall in addition to recording any
other entry about the work and conduct of the said Government
officer record also the assessment sent by the Chairman under
clause (a).
(2) The Chief officer shall have a dministrative control over all
officers and servants employed with the Zila Panchayat and in
particular, he shall have the right to send every year to such
authority, if any, which is required to record periodical entries
about the work and conduct of each such officer or servant as a
Government servant his assessment of the work and conduct of the
officer or servant. Such authority shall, in addition to recording an
entry about the work and conduct of the said Government servant,
also record the assessment sent by the Chief officer .
(3) Heads of departments of the Zila Panchayat shall have
immediate control over officers and servants working in their
respective departments.
Dispute amongst
Zila Panchayat and
Nagar Nikay s etc. 117 If any dispute arises as to the jurisdiction of a Zila Panchayat or
between two or more Zila Panchayat or Nagar Panchayat or the
Municipal ity or a Municipal corporation , it shall be referred to the
prescribed authority whose decision shall be final and shall not be
questioned i n any court of law.
Custody and mode
to proof the records
of Zila Panchayat 118 (1) Such records which are necessary to maintain in the Zila
panchayat as may be prescribed by the State Government from time
to time shall be maintained.
(2) Such prescrib ed all records by the State Governm ent shall
be maintained in the O ffice.
(3) On application to the Zila Panchayat and on payment of
prescribed fee in case of demand of any information by any person
the copy of records shall be issued by the signature of the
prescribed authority;
Provided that no records shall be maintained other than
available financial sources, amounts for the purposes of various
works by the state Government or Central Government or any
other institutions .
---------------------- --

Chapter XXI
Fund, Property and c ontracts of Zila Panchayat
Custody and deposit
of Zila Nidhi 119 Subject to the provision s of this Act, the Zila Nidhi, in reference to
the Zila Panchayat, shall be deposit ed in such Treasury or sub treasury or in s uch Nationalized Banks, Local Banks, Co operative
Banks and post office after opening account therein decided by as
State Government .
Property vested in
Zila Panchayat 120 (1) Subject to any saving made by the State Government, all
property of the nature s pecified in this section and situated within
the khand/district, shall vest in and belong to the Zila Panchayat and
shall with all such other property which may become vested in the
Zila Panchayat , be under it direction, management and control and
shall be held and applied for the purpose of this Act, that is to say -
(a) all public buildings of every description which have been
constructed or are maintained out of the Zila Nidhi ;
(b) all public roads, which have been constructed or are
maintained out o f the Zila Nidhi and the stones and other
materials thereof and also all trees, erections, materials,
implements and things provided for such roads; and
(c) all land and other property transferred to the Zila
Panchayat by Government, or by gift, sale or o therwise for
local public purposes.
(d) all tanks and wells and all adjacent lands, buildings,
materials and things connected therewith appertaining thereto
within the district/ Khand, not being private property and not
being maintained or controlled by any Government or by a local
authority other than the Zila Panchayat.
(2)(a) Where a Zila Panchayat for the purpose of exercising any
power s or performing any duty conferred or imposed upon it under
this or any other enactment, desires to acquire permane ntly or
temporarily, any land or any right in respect of land, it, may request
the State Government to acquire at, its cost the same under the
provisions of the the Right to Fair Compensation and transparency
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettl ement Act, 2013
(Central Act No.30 of 2013) , or of any other existing law.
(b) On the acquisition by the State Government of such land or such
right under the aforesaid provisions and on payment by the Zila
Panchayat, as the case may be, to the State Gove rnment of the
compensation awarded thereunder and of the charges incurred by the
State Government in connection with the proceedings, the land or
right, as the case may be, shall vest in the Zila Panchayat or the, as
the case may be.
(3) Public instituti on-

(a) The management, control and administration of every public
institution maintained exclusively out of the Zila Nidhi sh all
vest in the Zila Panchayat.
(b) Any other public institution may also be vested in or placed
under the management, control an d administration of a Zila
Panchayat:
Provided that the extent of the authority of the Zila Panchayat
in respect thereof, may be prescribed by rule.
(c) All property, endowments and funds belonging to an public
institution vesting in, or placed under , the management, control and
administration of a Zila Panchayat, shall be held by the Zila
Panchayat in trust for the purpose to which such property,
endowments and funds were lawfully applicable at the time when
the institution became so vested or was so placed :
Provided that nothing in the foregoing provisions of this
section shall be held to prevent the vesting of any trust property in
the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments under the Charitable
Endowments Act, 1890(Act no 6 of 1890).
Preparation and
passing the budget
of the Zila
Panchayat 121 (1) The Zila Panchayat shall, with the help of Planning and
development Committee , in the manner prescribed and with due
regard to the provisions prepare every year before such date as
is fixed by rule in this behalf, a complete account of its actual
and expected receipts and expenditure for the year ending an the
thirty -first day of March next following such date, together with
a budget estimate for the year commencing on the first day of
April nex t fallowing.
(2) In preparing the budget estimate under sub -section (1) the
estimate of income shall show separately grants from the State
Government towards planning and development activities and
the estimate of expenditure shall show separately how suc h
grants are proposed to be expended.
(3) The Chairman shall thereafter lay at a meeting of the Zila
Panchayat before a date to be fixed by rule in this behalf the
account and budget estimate prepared under sub -section (1).
(4) The Zila Panchayat shal l, at the meeting referred to in sub section (3) discuss and then by a special resolution -
(a) pass the budget as a whole, or
(b) pass the budget with any modif ications, which it may
deem fit , or
(c) remit the budget to the planning and Development
Commi ttee for fresh preparation.

(5) Where the Zila Panchayat has remitted a budget under clause (c)
of sub -section (4), the Planning and Development Committee
shall prepare a fresh budget and the Chairman shall put such
budget in the meeting of Zila Pancha yat and the Zila Panchayat
shall discuss it and by special resolution either pass it as a
whole or after such amendment as it thinks fit.
(6)(a) The Chairman shall submit to the State Government the
original budget and the amended budget , if any and t he budget,
as passed by the Zila Panchayat and the State Government may,
the budget as passed by the Zila Panchayat as a whole or with
any such alteration in respect of that portion which relates to
expenditure out of grants made by the State Government to wards
planning and development activities as he may thank fit to make
for gi ving effect to the purposes o f such grant and may in respect
of the remaining portion make such recommendations as he
thinks fit;
(b) If the State Government does not make any
recommendations within one month under clause (a) the budget with
the modification, if any, made by it under the said clause, shall be
deemed to have been finally passed. If the State Government made
any recommendation under clause (a) the same shall be laid by the
Chairman before the meeting of Zila Panchayat which may make
changes in the budget in pursuance of the recommendation. The
budget with alterations, if any, made by the State Government of the
division under clause (a) and the chan ge, if any, made by the Zila
Panchayat under this clause shall then be deemed to have been
finally passed;
(c) If before such date as may be fixed by rule in this behalf the
Zila Panchayat has not passed or has not been deemed to have
passed the budget or if the Chairman has not submitted any budget
or budgets under the provisions of clause 6(b), the State
Government , may call upon the Chairman to furnish such
information as he may require and may prepare a budget for the Zila
Panchayat and such budget shall be deemed to have been finally
passed by the Zila Panchayat .
(d) If before such date as may be fixed by rule in this behalf the
recommendations of the State Government are not placed before the
Zila Panchayat as required under clause 6(b) or the Zila Panchayat
has not taken any decision thereon, the budget shall be deemed to
have been finally passed with modifications as recommended by the
State Government.
(7) The Zila Panchayat may, in consultation with the Planning and
Development C ommittee , vary from time to tim e as
circumstances may render desirable the budget deemed to have

been finally passed:
Provided that every variation of the budget by the Zila
Panchayat shall be submitted by the Chairman to the State
Government and such variation shall be as possi ble subject to the
provisions of sub -section (5), a copy of passed budget finally by
the Zila Panchayat according as above in sub section (5) the
Chairman shall forward to the State Government for sanction.
The State Government shall intimate to the Zila Panchayat within
days of his sanctioned related to the budget. if sanctioned is
not received after this period than in such case budget shall be
deemed passed suo motto .
(8) In framing of a budget, a 4{planning and development
committee } shall provide f or the maintenance of such minimum
closing balance, if any, as the State Government may, by order,
prescribe.
(9) Every Zila Panchayat shall submit a copy of its budget as finally
passed to the commissioner of the division and another copy to
the State Go vernment.
(10) (a) Where a budget or revised budget of a Zila Panchayat has
been finally passed under this Act, the Zila Panchayat shall not
incur any expenditure under any of the heads of the budget,
other than the head providing for the refund of taxes, in excess
of the amount passed under that head, without making
provision s for such excess by the variation or alteration of the
budget.
(b) Where any expenditure under any head providing for the
refund, of taxes is incurred in excess of the amount approv ed or
sanctioned under that head, provision s shall be made without delay
for such expenditure by the variation or alteration of the budget.
(11) The certain provision s relating to the budget of Zila Panchayat
shall be applicable on the budget of Kshe ttra panchaya t. The
provisions of 2{sub -sections (8), (9) and (10)} and shall
mutatis mutandis apply to the budget of a Kshettra Panchayat .
Audit of Accounts of
the Zila Panchayats 122 (1) The Audit of the accounts of the Zila Panchayat shall be made
every year in such procedure as may be appoint by local fund
accounts Audit department or other authority who is determined
for this purpose by the State Government. A copy of Audit report
shall be provided within a month after completion of audit to the
concer ning Panchayat by the department.
----------------------------------- --

(2) On receipt of audit report the 1{Zila Panchayat shall remove
errors and irregularity found in the audit } and a compliance
report shall be forward to the local fund account audit
department or other authority within three month determined for
this purpose by the State Government.
XXII
Taxation a nd Levy Of Fees , Cess and Tolls
Taxes which
may be
imposed by
the Zila
Panchayat 123 (1) The taxes which the Zila Panchayat may impose or continue the
imposition of for the purpose of this Act shall be the following;
namely -
(a) any other tax which the State Legislature has the
power s under the Co nstitution of India, including a rticle 277
thereof, to impose in the State and of which imposition by the
Zila Panchayat has been uthorized by the State Government.
(2) The taxes shall be assessed and levie d subject to the prov isions
of article 285 of “the Constitution of India” and in accordance with
the provisions of this Act and rules, regulations and bye­laws framed
thereunder.
(3) fee and other fee under the provisions made otherwise under this
Act.
(4) fee of vehicles regi stration;
(5) fee on assessment.
Powers of State
Government to
sanction or refuse
proposals of
Zila
Panchayat 124 (1) When the Zila Panchayat has finally settled its proposal, it shall
submit them alongwith the objections, if any, make in connection
therewith to the prescribed authority, who shall submit the proposals
and objections, if any, to the State Government.
2{(2) The state government after considering the said objections, if
any, may either refuse to sanction the proposals or return them to the
Zila Panchayat for further consideration, or sanction them without
modification or with such modification, not involving any increase
of the amount to be imposed, as it deems fit.
(3) When the State Government has sanctioned the proposals of the
Zila Panchayat under sub -section (2), it shall, after taking into
consideration the draft rules submitted by the Zila Panchayat,
proceed forthwith in to make such rules in respect of the tax under
(4) When the rules are framed, a copy of them shall be sent to the
Zila Panchayat }
---------------------------------------------

1{Resolution of Zila
Panchayat directing
imposition of tax,
taxation, procedure
for altering taxes,
altered or modified
procedu re in respect
of certain taxes and
exemption} 125 (1) Upon receipt of the copy of the rules sent under the preceding
section, the Zila Panchayat shall b y special resolution direct the
imposition of the tax with effect from a date, to be specified in the
resolution, not less than six weeks from the date of such resolution.
(2) A copy of the resolution passed by the Zila Panchayat shall be
submitted to th e State Government.
2{(3) Upon receipt of the copy of the resolution, the State Government
shall notify in the Gazette the imposition of tax from the date
specified under sub section (1) and the imposition of a tax shall in
all cases be subject to the con dition that it has been so notified. }
3{(4) A notification of the imposition of a tax under sub section (3)
shall be conclusive proof that the tax has been imposed in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(5) The procedure for abolishing or suspe nding a tax, or for altering a
tax in respect of the subjects referred in clauses (b) and (c) of sub
section (1) of section 167 shall, be the same as prescribed for the
taxation.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions,
the Stat e Government may, by rule, prescribe such other or
modified procedure for the imposition and alteration of any tax
mentioned in clause (a) of sub section (1) of section 123, as it may
deem fit.
(7) (i) A Zila Panchayat may exempt, for a period not excee ding one
year, from the payment of a tax or any part of it, imposed under this
Act, any person who is, in its opinion, by reason of poverty, unable
to pay the tax and may renew the same exemption as often as it
deems necessary.
(ii) A Zila Panc hayat may, by a special resolution confirmed by
the prescribed authority, exempt from the payment tax or any part
of it, imposed under this Act, any person or class of person or any
property or its part.
(iii) The State Government may, by order, e xempt from the
payment of tax, or any part of it, imposed under this Act, any
person or class of person or any property or its part.
(8) The right to approve and sanction a proposal, by the Gram
Panchayat of district to impose any tax or charges or user charges
mentioned in section 46 of the Act and right to sanction the bye laws under section 29 and 106 of the Act for any Gram panchayat
then the district shall vest in the Zila panchayat of the district from
fix date .}
-------------------------------

Part - V
Chapter XXIII
Rules, Regulation and By e-laws
1{Power of State
Government to
make rules i n
respect of Kshettra
Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat } 126 (1) The State Government may by notification in the Gazette
make rules consistent with this Act in respect of any matter or
matters for which the power s of making rules is expressly or by
implication conferred by this Act, and may also make rules which
are otherwise requisite for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Any rule made under sub -section (1) may be general for all
Zila Panchayats or all Kshettra Panchayats , all Gram Panchayat and
speci al for any one or more Zila Panchayats or Kshettra Panchayats
to be specified.
2{(3) All rules made under this Act shall, thereafter as soon as it
is made shall be laid before State Legislative Assembly, while it is
in session for a total period of thirty days extending in one session or
more than one successive sessions, and shall, unless some later date
is appointed, take effect from the date of their publication in the
Gazette, subject to such modifications or annulments as the State
Legislative Assembly, may during the said period agree to make so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder .}.
Power s to make
regulations as to
conduct of business
etc. 127 (1) A Zila Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Gram Panchayat
may, by special resolution, make regulations consistent with
this Act and with any rule, and with any regulation made by the
State Government as to all or any of the following matters : -
(a) the ti me and place of its meetings;
(b) the manner of convening meetings, and of giving notice
thereof;
(c) the conduct of proceedings including the asking of
questions by members at meetings, and the adjournment of
meetings ;
(d) the establishment of committ ees other than advisory
committees, for any purpose and the determination of all matters
relating to the constitution and procedure of such committees ;
(e) the delegation of powers, duties or functions, to:
(i) Chairman of the Zila Panchayat or Pramukh of
Kshettra Panchayat;
(ii) a committee constituted under clause (d) ;
-------------

(iii) a chairman of such committee ;
(iv) the Chief Development Officer, Additional
Development O fficer or any other servant of the Zila
Panchayat ;
1{(f) The absentee or other allowances of the servants
employed by the Zila Panchayat including the servants placed at
the disposal of the Kshettra Pan chayat ;}
(g) the amount and nature of the security to be furnished by
a servant of a Zila Panchayat including a servant placed at the
disposal of any Kshettra Panchayat from whom it is deemed
expendient to require security;
(h) the grant of leave to serva nts of a Zila Panchayat, and
the remuneration to be paid to the persons, if any, appointed to
act for them whilst on leave ;
(i) the conditions of service, including period of service of
all servants of a Zila Panchayat including servants placed at the
disposal of any Kshettra Panchayat and the conditions under
which such servants, or any of them, shall receive gratuities,
annuities or compassionate allowances on retirement or on their
becoming disabled through the execution of their duty, and the
amount o f such gratuities, annuities or compassionate allowances
and the conditions under which any gratuities, annuities or
compassionate allowances may be paid to the surviving relatives
of any such servants whose death has been caused through the
execution of their duty;
(j) the payment of contribution, at such rates and subject to
such conditions, as may prescribed in such regulations, to a
pension. or provident fund established by the Zila Panchayat, or
with the approval of the Zila Panchayat by the said se rvants;
(k) principles and manners, of recruitment in, respect of
the servants of the Zila Panchayats including servants placed at
the disposal of any Kshettra Panchayat ;
(1) procedure to be followed, in making documents
available to the Finance office r for audit and the action to be
taken upon observations made by him ;
(m) procedure to be followed in filling casual vacancies of
officers and servants ;
(n) manner in which the functions transferred to the Zila
Panchayat under section 108 shall be per formed:
--------------------------------------------

Provided that the regulations framed in the foregoing
clause shall be in conformity with any, general or special orders
of instructions issued b y the State Government ;
(o) the conditions subject to which sums due to a Zila
Panchayat or a Kshettra Panchayat may be written off as
irrecoverable, and the conditions subject to which the whole or
any part of a fee chargeable for distress, may be remi tted;
(P) all matters similar to, those set forth in clause (e) to (o)
or in respect of which powers to make regulations is conferred
expressly or by implication in this Act and not otherwise
provided for in this sub -section; and
(q) all matters similar to those set forth in clauses (a) to (d)
and not otherwise provided for in this sub -section.
(2) The State Government may, if it thinks fit, make regulations
consistent with this Act in respect of any of the matters specified
in clauses (e) to (m) and (o) to (q) of sub -section (1) and any
regulation so made shall have the effect of rescinding any
regulation made by the Zila Panchayat under the said sub -section
in respect of the same matter or in consistent therewith.
(3) In addition to foregoing subject in the preceding sub sections for
the Gram Panchayat the State Government of in direction of the
State Government the designate authority may make rules.
1{Power of state
government to
make rules for
Gram Panchayat
(1) The State Government may by notification in the Gazette make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing powers such rules may provide for -
(i) any matter for which powers to make provision is conferred
expressly or by implication on the State Government by
this Act;
(ii) the establishment of Gram Sabha or the constitution of
Gram Panchayat;
(a) qualifications for the Pradhan, Up -Pradhan and Members;
(b) presentation and disposal of election petitions and
applications for revision under section 131H;
--------------------

(c) taking of oath by Pradhan, Up -Pradhan, members of
Gram Panchayats ;
(d) filing of resignation by Pradhan, Up -Pradhan , members
of Gram Panchayats;
(e) holding of general elections and bye -elections;
(f) the nomination of persons as a Pradhan and member of
Gram Panchayat;
(g) Duties and powers of Up -Pradhan;
(h) the carrying out of duties of the Pradhan and the Up­
Pradhan in their absence for any cause ;
(3) the time and place of the meetings of' Gram Sabha, and Gram
Panchayat, the manner of convening meetings and giving
notice thereof;
(4) the conduct of proceedings including the asking of question
by members at me etings and the adjournment of meetings
and also minute book of meetings ;
(5) the establishment of committees and the determination of all
matters relating to the constitution and procedure of such
committees;
(6) the suspension and removal of office beare rs;
(7) the records and the registers that shall be maintained by the
Gram Panchayat and the form in which they are to be ;
(8) The action to be taken on the occurrence of vacancy in the
executive committee, joint committee or any other
committee ;
(9) the a uthority by which disputes in relation to appointments to
executive committee, joint committee, or any other
committee may be decided and the procedure to be followed
therein ;
(10) the amount and the nature of security to be furnished by a
servant of the Gram Panchayat from which it is deemed
expedient to require security ;
(11) appointment, qualifications, supervision, dismissal,
discharge, removal or other punishment and other matters
relating to the conditions of service, leave, transfer, pay and
privile ges of the servants of the Gram Panchayat and their
rights to appeal ;
(12) management and regulation of provident fund for the
servants of Gram Panchayats if the system of provident fund
is adopted by any Gram Panchayat;
(13) the establishment, maintenan ce and management of primary
schools and the construction and repair of buildings thereof;
(14) the establishment, administration and control of libraries,

reading rooms, dispensaries entrusted to a joint committee,
the construction and repairs of building s connected therewith
and the supply of medicine and medical assistance to the
poor inhabitant of the Panchayat area;
(15) the discovery, removal and destruction of water hyacinth,
grass, weed or other wild growth on any land, premises or
water, the cons truction of fences and barriers for checking its
movements and the cost incurred in carrying out such work;
(16) (a) action in regard to the sanitation, conservancy,
drainage, buildings, public streets and water supply and the
prohibition of public nui sance;
(b) the carrying out of function and duties of Gram
Panchayat mentioned in section 22, 23,24 and 28 ;
(17) the Framing of annual estimate of income a expenditure and
earmarking of funds for specific purpose ;
(18) the returns to be submitted b y Gram Panchayat, the form in
which they are to be, the authorities to which and the time
when they shall be submitted when required;
(19) the levy of taxes and licence fees, the authority, by which
and the manner in which the taxes may be assessed and the
authority to which an appeal from an assessment order may
be made;
(a) collection of State and other dues by Gram
Panchayats and remuneration to be paid therefor ;
(20) the method and time of payment of taxes and other dues, the
procedure of reco very and the authority whose assistance
may be taken by Gram Panchayats in the recovery of taxes
and dues;
(21) the method of account keeping of Gram Panchayats ;
(22) the maintenance of public buildings and nazul land;
(23) the formalities to be observ ed when transferring any property
and the manner in which a deed of contract may be executed
by a Gram Panchayat;
(24) powers of auditors, inspection and superintending authorities
to hold inquiry, summoning and examining of witnesses
compelling the produ ction of documents and all other
matters connected with audit, inspection and
superintendence ;
(25) the powers that may be exercised by Zila Panchayat or by
any prescribed authority in the discharge of their obligations
under this Act and the manner in which such powers may
be exercised ;
(26) the procedure to be observed in the making of by­laws by
prescribed authority for Gram Panchayat or by Gram

Panchayats;
(27) the prescribing and printing of forms and registers generally
relating to any matter und er this Act or rules made
thereunder;
(28) the submission for approval of plans, designs, specifications
and estimates;
(29) the duties, powers and functions of village volunteer force;
(30) the submission of annual reports by Gram Panchayats and
their r eview;
(31) persons, other than members of Gram Panchayats, who may
be present in an advisory capacity in meetings of Gram
Panchayats;
(32) channel of correspondence between Gram Panchayat, Gram
Sabha and other authorities ;
(33) disposal of assets and lia bilities of a Gram Sabha and a Gram
Panchayat on its abolition;
(34) the action to be taken on the inclusion of the whole or part of
the local area of any Gram Panchayat in any city,
municipality, notified area, town area, or cantonment, and
the manner in which the assets and liabilities of the Gram
Panchayat may be disposed of in such circumstances;
(35) the conditions subject to which sums due to a Gram
Panchayat may be written off as irrecoverable, and the
conditions subject to which the whole or any part of a fee
may remitted ; and generally for the guidance of Gram
Panchayats, joint committees, other committees, servants of
the Government and other authorities in any matter
connected with the carrying out of the provision of this Act ;
(36) the regula tion of the election of the members of the Gram
Panchayat in order to secure the adequate representation of
the Scheduled Castes;
(37) assistance to be given by the Gram Panchayat to Government
servants on any matter affecting the general administration;
(38) borrowing and lending of money by Gram Panchayats;
(39) the matters which are to be and may be prescribed; and
(40) any matter in respect of in sub -section (8) of section 125
which power is conferred to prescribed authority to frame a
bye-law for a Gram Panchayat. }
Part VI - Chapter XXIV
Miscellaneous Provisions
Miscellaneous
Provisions 129 (1) The forest Panchayats with coordinate to the Gram Panchayat
shall implement their business. The State Government for such
business shall makes such pr ovisions as may be prescribed with the

consent of forest department.
(2) The State Government 1{may} delegate the financial and
administrative powers of the Pradhan, Up pradhan of Gram
Panchayat, Pram ukh, senior Up Pramukh, Junior U p pramukh of the
Kshett ra Panchayat and Chairman, Vice chairman, Chief Executive
officer and other officers of the Zila panchayat as such as may be
prescribed.
(3) The State Government 1{may} transfer 29 subjects
mentioned in the 11th Schedule of the Constitution to the Panchay at
as may be prescribed.
(4) The State Government 1{may} determined as may be
prescribed such three separate Schedule for duties and
responsibilities of the Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat as mentioned in the 29 subject in sub sectio n (3).
(5) The State Government has right to cancel or bar the meetings
of the three tiers Panchayats resolutions, made out of jurisdiction
and aganist the porvision of this Act and the rules made their under
till further order .
(6) The State Governmen t for aggregation of planning prepared
by Panchayats and Nagar Palika at the level of district shall
constitute district planning committee. The district planning
committee shall Act under the Act /rule made for this purposes.
Chapter XXV
Miscellaneous
Division of
territorial
consciences of three
tiers Panchayat and
ratio of de limitation
numbers 130 (1) F or the purpose of election of members of Gram Panchayat,
Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat every Panchayat area shall
be divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that the
ratio between the population of each constituency and the member
of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same
throughout the Panchayat area.
(2) each territorial constituency of a Gram Panchayat, Kshettra
Panchayat and Zila Panchayat shall be represented by member in the
Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat .
(3) the territorial constituency of a Gram Panchayat , Kshettra
Panchayat and the Zila Panchayat may be delimitated in the
prescribed manner by the Government -
(a) Any Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat shall, unless sooner dissolved continue for five years
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer;
----------------------------------- -------------
1-Subs words by section 13 (i),(ii) and (iii) of UK Act no 18 of 2020.

(b) An election to constit ute a Gram Panchayat, Kshettra
Panchayat and Zila Panchayat shall be completed –
(i) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause ( a);
(ii) before the expiration of a period of six months from the
date of its dissolution :
Provided that where the remainder of the period for which
the dissolved Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat would have continued is less than six months, it shall not
be necessary to hold any election under this sub -section for
constituting the Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat ;
(4) Any Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat constituted upon the dissolutio n of a Gram Panchayat,
Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat before the expiration of its
duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period for
which the dissolved Gram Panchayat would have continued under
clause (4) had it not been so dissolved ;
(5) The constitution of a Gram Panchayat , Kshettra Panchayat
and Zila Panchayat shall be notified in such manner as may be
prescribed and thereupon the Gram Panchayat , Kshettra Panchayat
and Zila Panchayat shall be deemed to have been duly constituted,
any vacancy therein notwithstanding :
Provided that the constitution of a Gram Panchayat , Kshettra
Panchayat and Zila Panchayat shall not be notified till the Pradhan ,
Pramukh, Chairman and at least two -thirds of the members of the
Panchayat have been elected.
1¿(6) NNoottwwiitthhssttaannddiinngg aannyytthhiinngg ccoonnttaaiinneedd iinn aannyy ootthheerr pprroovviissiioonnss ooff
tthhiiss AAcctt,, wwhheerree dduuee ttoo iinneevviittaabbllee cciirrccuummssttaanncceess,, oorr iinn ppuubblliicc
iinntteerreesstt,, iitt iiss nnoott ffeeaassiibbllee ttoo ccoonndduucctt eelleeccttiioonn ffoorr ccoonnssttiittuuttiioonn ooff
aannyy GGrraamm PPaanncchhaayyaatt,, KKsshheettttrraa PPaanncchhaayyaatt oorr ZZiillaa PPaanncchhaayyaatt
bbeeffoorree tthhee eexxppiirraattiioonn ooff iittss tteerrmm,, tthhee SSttaattee GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt oorr aannyy
ooffffiicceerr aauutthhoorriisseedd bbyy iitt iinn tthhiiss bbeehhaallff mmaayy bbyy oorrddeerr aappppooiinntt
aaddmmiinniissttrraattoorr aanndd ssuucchh aaddmmiinniissttrraattoorr sshhaallll hhoolldd tthhee ppoosstt ffoorr
ssuucchh ppeerriioodd nnoott eexxcceeeeddiinngg ssiixx mmoonntthhss aass ssppeecciiffiieedd iinn tthhee ssaaiidd
oorrddeerr aanndd sshhaallll ddiisscchhaarrggee aallll ppoowweerrss aanndd ffuunnccttiioonnss,, ooff PPrraaddhhaann
iinn ccaassee ooff GGrraamm PPaanncchhaayyaatt,, PPrraammuukkhh iinn ccaassee ooff KKsshheettttrraa
PPaanncchhaayyaatt,, CChhaaiirrmmaann iinn ccaassee ooff ZZiillaa PPaanncchhaayyaatt wwiitthh ppoowweerrss
aanndd ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff tthhee ccoommmmiitttteeeess ooff tthhrreeee lleevveell PPaanncchhaayyaattss::
----------- -------------------

PPrroovviiddeedd tthhaatt wwhheerree nnoo eelliiggiibbllee ccaannddiiddaattee iiss aavvaaiillaabbllee,, ffoorr
PPrraaddhhaann aanndd wwhheerree iinn tthhee ooppiinniioonn ooff tthhee SSttaattee EElleeccttiioonn
CCoommmmiissssiioonn iitt iiss nnoott ffeeaassiibbllee ttoo ccoonndduucctt eelleeccttiioonn dduuee ttoo eexxiisstteennccee
ooff ssuucchh eemmeerrggeennccyy cciirrccuummssttaanncceess,, tthhee SSttaattee GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt oorr aannyy
ooffffiicceerr aauutthhoorriisseedd bbyy iitt iinn tthhiiss bbeehhaallff mmaayy,, bbyy oorrddeerr,, aappppooiinntt
aaddmmiinniissttrraattoorr ffoorr ssuucchh ppeerriioodd aass ssppeecciiffiieedd iinn ssaaiidd oorrddeerr::
PPrroovviiddeedd ffuurrtthheerr tthhaatt wwhheerree ttwwoo tthhiirrdd mmeemmbbeerrss,, hhaavvee nnoott
bbeeeenn eelleecctteedd,, ffoorr tthhee ccoonnssttiittuuttiioonn ooff GGrraamm PPaanncchhaayyaatt aanndd iinn tthhee
ooppiinniioonn ooff tthhee SSttaattee EElleeccttiioonn CCoommmmiissssiioonn iitt iiss nnoott ffeeaassiibbllee ttoo
ccoonndduucctt eelleeccttiioonn dduuee ttoo tthhee eexxiisstteennccee ooff eemmeerrggeennccyy cciirrccuummssttaanncceess,,
aannyy eelliittee ppeerrssoonn ooff ccoonncceerrnneedd GGrraamm PPaanncchhaayyaatt mmaayy bbee nnoommiinnaatteedd,,
bbyy tthhee SSttaattee GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt oorr aannyy ooffffiicceerr aauutthhoorriisseedd bbyy iitt iinn tthhiiss
bbeehhaallff,, bbyy oorrddeerr oonn tthhee ppoosstt ooff mmeemmbbeerr GGrraamm PPaanncchhaayyaatt,, ffoorr ssuucchh
ppeerriioodd aass ssppeecciiffiieedd iinn ssaaiidd oorrddeerr,, ttiillll eelleeccttiioonn..À
Other provisions
related to the
electoral 131 1{(1) Subject to the supervisi on and control of the State Election
Commission, the District Magistrate shall supervise the conduct
of all elections of Chairman and Vice -chairman and Members of
Panchayat in the district and shall perform all related functions to
it.
(2) Every local aut hority and the management of every
educational institution receiving grant -in-aid from the State
Government in the district shall, when so required by the District
Magistrate, make available to him or to any other officer
appointed by the District Magistra te as Election Officer, Assistant
Election Officer in accordance with the direction issued by the
State Election Commission, such staff as may be necessary for the
performance of any duties in connection with such election.
(3) The State Election Commissio n may likewise require all or
any of the local authorities and the managements of all or any of
such institutions as aforesaid in the state to make available to any
officer referred to in sub -section (2) such staff as may be
necessary for the performance o f any duties in connection with
such elections and they shall comply with every such requisition.
(4) Where any employee of any local authority or institution
referred to in sub -section (2) or sub section (3) is appointed to
perform any duty in connection with such lections, he shall be
bound to perform such duty. }
----------------------------------------

1{Penalty of breach
of his official duty
131.A (1) If any person to whom this section applies is w ithout reasonable
cause, guilty of any act in breach of his official duty, he shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to rupees 250 or as
prescribed.
(2) An offence punishable under sub -section (1) shall be cognizable.
(3) No suit or other legal pr oceeding shall lie against any such person
for damage in respect of any such act as aforesaid.
(4) The person to whom this section applies are the Election Officer,
Assistant Election Officer, Presiding Officer, Polling Officer and
any other person appoint ed to perform any duty in connection
with the receipt of nominations or withdrawal of candidature, or
the recording or counting of votes at an election and the
suppression official duty shall for the purpose of this section be
constructed accordingly, but shall not include duties imposed
otherwise than by or under this Act.
Requisition of
property 131B (1) If it appears to the District Magistrate or State Election
Commission that in connection with an election under this act within
the district or state.
(i) any premises are needed or likely to be needed for the purpose
of being used as a polling place or for the storage of ballot
boxes after the poll has been taken, or
(ii) any vehicle, vessel or animal is needed or likely to be needed
for the purpose of transportation of ballot boxes to or from any
polling place or transportation of members of the police force
for maintaining order during the conduct of such election or
transportation of any officer or other person for performance of
any duties in connec tion with such election, he may, by order
in, writing, requisition such premises or such vehicle, vessels
or animals, as the case may be and make such further orders
may appear to it to be necessary or requisitioning:
Provided that no vehic le, vessel or animal which is
being lawfully used by a candidate or his agent for any purpose
connected with the election of such candidate shall be
requisitioned under this sub section until the completion of the
polling at such election.
(2) The requisi tion shall be effected by an order in writing
addressed to the person deemed by the District Magistrate and State
election commission to be the owner or person in possession of the
property and such order shall be served in the prescribed manner on
the per son to whom it is addressed.
--------------------------------
2020.

(3) Whenever any property is requisitioned under this section,
the period o f such requisition shall not extend beyond the period for
which such property is required for any of the purposes mentioned in
that sub -section.
(4) In this section --
(a) “premises” means any land, building or part of a building and
includes a hut, shed or other structure or any part thereof;
(b) “vehicle” means any vehicle used or capable of being used for the
purpose or road transport, whether propelled by mechanical powers
or otherwise.
Determination of
compensation in
case of requisition 131C Whenever in pursuance of section 131B the District Magistrate and
State election commission requisition any premises, there shall be
paid to the persons interested compensation the amount of which
shall be determined by taking into consideration the following;
name ly—
(i) the rent payable in respect of the premises or if no rent is
so payable, the rent payable for similar premises in the locality;
(ii) if in consequence of the requisition of the premises the
person interested is compelled to change his residence or place
of business, the reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to such
change;
Provided that where any person interested being
aggrieved by the amount of compensation so determined makes
and application within the prescribed time t o the District
Magistrate, the State Election C ommission for referring the
matter to an arbitrator, the amount of compensation to be paid
shall be such as the arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the
District Magistrate may determine:
Provided further that wher e there is any dispute as to the
title to receive the compensation or as to the apportionment of
that amount of compensation, it shall be referred to an arbitrator
appointed in this behalf for determination and shall be
determined in accordance with the de cision of such arbitrator.
(iii) Whenever in pursuance of section 131B the District
Magistrate, and State Election C ommission requisitions any
premises, there shall be paid to the person interested
compensation the amount of which shall be determined by ta king
into consideration by the arbitrator appointed under this section
as the case may be;
Provided that the expression “person interested” means the
person who was in actual possession of the premises or vehicle
requisitioned under secti on 131B immediately before the requisition,
or where no person was in such actual possession, the owner of such

premises or vehicle.
Furnish information
to specified authority 131D The District Magistrate and State Election C ommission may with a
view to r equisitioning any property under section 131B or
determining the compensation payable under section 131C order,
require any person to furnish to such authority as may be specified in
the order such information in his possession relating to such property
as may be so specified.
Inspection by
authorised person 131E Any person authorized in this behalf by the District Magistrate and
State Election C ommission may enter into any premises and inspect
such premises and any vehicle, vessel or animal therein for th e
purpose of determining whether and if so in what manner, an order
under section 131B should be made in relation to such premises
vehicle, vessel or animal or with a view to securing compliance with
any order made under that section.
summarily eviction 131F Any person remaining in possession of any requisitioned premises or
vehicle in contravention of any order made under section 131B may
be summarily evicted from the premises by any officer empowered
by the District Magistrate in this behalf. Any officer so empowered
may, after giving to any woman not appearing in public reasonable
warning and facility to withdraw, remove or open any lick or bolt or
break open any door of any building or do any other act necessary for
effecting such eviction.
Delivery of possession
of Vehicle or
requisitioned
premises 131G (1) When any premises or vehicle requisitioned under section
131B are to be released from requisition, the possession thereof shall
be delivered to the person from whom possession was taken at the
time when the premises were requisitioned, or if there were no such
person to the person deemed by the District Magistrate from all
liabilities in respect of such delivery, but shall not prejudice any
rights in respect of the premises or vehicle which any other person
may be entitled by due process of law to enforce against the person to
whom possession of the premises or vehicle is so delivered.
(2) Where the person to whom possession of any premises or
vehicle requisitioned under section 131B is to be given un der sub section (1) cannot be found or is not readily ascertainable or has no
agent or any other person empowered to accept delivery on his
behalf, the District Magistrate shall cause a notice declaring that
such premises or vehicle are released from requi sition to be affixed
on some conspicuous part of such premises or vehicle and publish
the notice in the Official Gazette.
(3) When a notice referred to in sub -section (2) is published in the
Official Gazette, the premises or vehicle specified in such notic e shall
cease to be subject to requisition on and from the date of such
publication and be deemed to have been delivered to the person
entitled to possession thereof and the District Magistrate shall not be
liable for any compensation or other claim in res pect of such

premises or vehicle for any period after the said date.
application
regarding election
and their revision 131H (1) The election of a person as Pradhan or Up -Pradhan or as member
of a Gram Panchayat shall not be called in question except by an
application presented to such authority within such time and in such
manner as may be prescribed, on the ground: -
(a) that this election has not been free election by reason that the
corrupt practice of bribery or undue influence has extensively
prevaile d at the election; or
(b) that the result of the election has been materially affected -
(i) by the acceptance or rejection of any nomination in
improper manner; or
(ii) by gross failure to comply with the provisions of this Act
or the rules framed there under.
(2) The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practice of bribery
or undue influence for the purpose of this Act -
(a) bribery, namely: -
(i) a person to stand or not to stand or to withdraw from being
a candidate at an election; or
(ii) with objective of inducing any elector to vote or refrain
voting of an election direct or indirect or to any person for
the thing that: -
(1) a person for having so stood or not stood, for having
withdrawn his candidature;
(2) an elector for having voted as re frained from voting for
this purposes:
to propose or promise of any seat or reward on the
port of a candidate is any other person what so ever with the
connivance as served.
(b) Undue influence, that is to say, any direct or indirect
interference or attempt to interfere on the part of a candidate or of
any other person with the connivance of the candidate with the free
exercise of any electoral right :
Provided that without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions of this clause any such person as is referred to therein
who-
(i) threatens any candidate, or any elector, or any person in
whom a candidate or an elector is interested with injury of any
kind including social ostracism and ex -communication or
expulsion from any caste or community ; or
(ii) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or an elector to
believe that he or any person in whom he is interested will
become or will, be rendered an object of divine displeasure or

spiritual censure shall be deemed to interfere wi th the free exercise
of the electoral right of such candidate or elector within the
meaning of this clause,
(3) The application under sub -section (1) may be presented by
any candidate at the election or any elector and shall contain such
particulars as m ay be prescribed;
Explanation :- Any person, who filed a nomination paper at the
election whether such nomination paper was accepted or rejected,
shall be deemed to be a candidate at the election.
(4) The authority to whom the application under sub -section
(1) is made shall, in the matter of -
(i) hearing of the application and the procedure to be followed
at such hearing,
(ii) setting aside the election or declaring the election to be
void or declaring the applicant to be duly elected or any othe r
relief that may be granted to the petitioner have such powers and
authority as may be prescribed.
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers to be
prescribed under sub -section (4) the rules may be provided for
summarily hearing and disposal o f an application under sub section (1).
(6) Any party aggrieved by an order of the prescribed authority
who shall be Assistant Collector (first class)/ Pargana Magistrate
of concerned Tehsil/ Pargana upon an application under sub section (1) may, within t hirty days from the date of the order,
apply to the District Judge for revision of such order or any one or
more on the following grounds; namely : -
(a) that the prescribed authority has exercised such jurisdiction
not vested in it by law;
(b) that the p rescribed authority has failed to exercise a such
jurisdiction so vested;
(c) that the prescribed authority has acted in the exercise of its
jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity.
(7) The District Judge may dispose of the application for
revision himself or may assign it for disposal to any Additional
District Judge, Civil Judge or Additional Civil Judge under his
administrative control and may recall it from any such officer or
transfer it to any other such officer.
(8) The revising au thority mentioned in sub -section (7) shall
follow such procedure as may be prescribed, and may confirm,
vary or rescind the order of the prescribed authority or remand the
case to the prescribed authority for re -hearing and pending its
decision pass such i nterim orders as may appear to it to be just and

convenient.
(9) The decision of the prescribed authority, subject to any
order passed by the revising authority under this section, and every
decision of the revising authority passed under this section, s hall
be final.
(10) If any question arises that any person is legally elected as
a Pramukh, Up -Pramukh or member of Kshettra Panchayat or
Chairman, Vice -Chairman or Member of Zila Panchayat or not or
he is eligible to be such Pramukh, Up - Pramukh or Membe r of
Kshettra Panchayat or Chairman, Vice -Chairman or Member of
Zila Panchayat or not then that question shall be referred to Judge
which means District Judge and its includes any other subordinate
Civil Judge nominated on ad hoc by District Judge under it , in
prescribed manner, whose decision shall be binding and final.
If Judge decides that any person is not legally elected as a
Pramukh, Up -Pramukh or Member of Kshettra Panchayat or
Chairman, Vice -Chairman or Member of Zila Panchayat or he is
not eligible to be such Pramukh, Up -Pramukh or Member of
Kshettra Panchayat or Chairman, Vice -Chairman or Member of
Zila Panchayat then he shall not remain as a Pramukh, Up -
Pramukh or Member of Kshettra Panchayat or Chairman, Vice Chairman or Member of Zila Panchayat from the date of such
decision.
Explanation: Duration fixed for submitting the objection
regarding the election of any person in the three tier Panchayat
General election, 2019 shall commence from the date of
commencement of this Act.
Supplementary
provisions 131 I (1) section 10A, 11A and section 123 of Chapter 1 and sections
125(a), 126,127, 127A,128,129, 130,131,132, 133, 134, 134A,
135, 135A, 135C, and 136 of Chapter 3 of Part VII of the
Representation of People Act, 1951 shall be appl icable as they
were -
(a) In relation to any election use direction under this Act the made
by direction of election;
(b) The words ‘the election of Pradhan, Up -Pradhan and Members
of Gram Panchayat shall be placed in place of ‘election area’.
(c) The w ords ‘State Election Commission’ shall be placed in
place of ‘Chief Election Officer’ in sub -clause (1) of c lause (b)
of sub -section (2) of section 127(A) of the Representation of
People Act, 1951.
(d) The word “by or under Uttarakhand Panchayat Raj Act, 2016
shall be substituted in place of “By or under this Act” in

(2) The words “ election of member, Pramukh, Up -Pramukh of
Kshettra Panchayat and Member, Chairman and Vice - Chairman”
shall be substituted by words “election area” of Zila Panchayat.
(3) Regarding election made under this Act and regulation where
there is no provisions in relation to election there shall be used as
necessity of the provision of the Representation of People Act , 1951
of the State of Uttarakhand.
Oath or
affirmation 131J (1) Every person elected on any p ost in Gram Panchayat, Khettra
Panchayat and Zila Panchayat shall, be entering upon any office
referred to in the sections make and subscribe before such
authority as may be prescribed on oath or affirmation and put his
signature in the form to be prescribed.
(2) Any member who declines or otherwise refuses to make and
subscribe an oath or affirmation and refuges to signature as
aforesaid shall be deemed to have vaca ted the office forthwith. }
1{Jurisdiction of
Civil C ourts in
election matters of
Gram Panchayat
barred 132 No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to question the legality of any
action taken or any decision given by an officer or authority
appointed in relation to the subjects related to election of Gram
Panchayat under this Act, in connection with the conduct of elections
thereunder. }1
Inspections, etc. of
prescribed authority
over Gram
Panchayat, Kshettra
Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat 133 (1) with the limits of its jurisdiction or district boundaries , as the
case, may be prescribed of State Government -
(a) Director - Within the jurisdiction of the State Director shall be
designated authority of the Zila Panchayat and inspect, or cause to be
inspected, any movable property used or occupied by a Zila
Panchayat or any committee or joint committee thereof, or any work
in progress under the direction of any of them .
(b) by written order call for and inspect a book or documents in, the
possession or under the control of a Panchayats or any committee
or joint committee thereof.
(c) by written order require a Panchayats , or any committee or joint
committee thereof to furnish such statements, accounts, reports
(including monthly reports of progress) or cop ies of documents,
relating to its proceedings or duties as he thinks fit to call for ; and
(d) record in writing, for the consideration of Panchayats, or any
committee or joint committee thereof any observations he thinks
proper in regard to its proceedi ngs or duties.
---------------------------------------------------

(2) District Magistrate - (a) shall be t he Prescribed Authority in
Kshettra Panchayat located in district . Inspect, or cause to be
inspected, any movable property used or occupied by a Kshettra
Panchayat or any committee or joint committee thereof, or any
work in progress under the direction of any of them .
(b) by written order call for and inspect a book or documents in, the
possession or under the control of a Kshettra Panchayat or any
committee or joint committee thereof.
(c) by written order require a Kshettra Panchayat, or any committee
or joint committee thereof to furnish such statements, accounts,
reports (including monthly repo rts of progress) or copies of
documents, relating to its proceedings or duties as he thinks fit to
call for ; and
(d) record in writing, for the consideration of Kshettra Panchayat, of
any committee or joint committee thereof any observations he
thinks p roper in regard to its proceedings or duties.
(3) Zila Panchayat Raj Adhikari - (a) shall be t he Prescribed
authority of Gram Panchayat located in the district . Inspect, or cause
to be inspected, any movable property used or occupied by a Gram
Panchayat o r any committee or joint committee thereof, or any work
in progress under the direction of any of them.
(b) by written order call for and inspect a book or documents in, the
possession or under the control of a Gram Panchayat or any
committee or joint com mittee thereof.
(c) by written order require a Gram Panchayat, or any committee or
joint committee thereof to furnish such statements, accounts,
reports (including monthly reports of progress) or copies of
documents, relating to its proceedings or duties as he thinks fit to
call for ; and
(d) record in writing, for the consideration of Gram Panchayat, of
any committee or joint committee thereof any observations he
thinks proper in regard to its proceedings or duties.
Other Power s and
duties of State
Government in
reference of 1{Zila
Panchayat } 134 (1) The State Government may, from time to time, call after
reasonable notice, a meeting of itself, the Chairman and the
Mukhys Adhikari , Additinal Mukhya Adhikari/officer and if
considered necessary also the Finance Officer , to discuss matters
relating to expenditure from the budget grant of the Zila Panchayat
relating to planning and development.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer, Ch ief Development Officer
through District Magistrate shall furnish quarter ly report to the State
Government about the progress of development work.
-----------------

Inspection of the
work of constructed
and institution by
prescribed
authorities 135 A work, or institution, constructed or maintained in whole or part, at
the expense of as Zila Panchayat , and all registers, books, accounts
or documents relating thereto shall at all times be opened to
inspection by such officers as the State Government appoints in this
behalf.
Powers of
prescribed authority
to
suspend action
under
the Act 136 (1) The prescribed authority may, within the limits of its
jurisdiction by order in writing, prohibit the execution or further
execution of a resolution or order passed or made under th is or any
other enactment by a Zila Panchayat, or committee of a Zila
Panchayat, or a joint committee, or servant of a Zila Panchayat or a
joint committee, if in its opinion such resolution or order is patently
illegal or Ultra virus or inconsistent with a ny order or direction
given by the State Government under this Act or is Of a nature to
cause or tend to cause obstruction, annoyance or injury to the public
or to any class or body or persons lawfully employed, or danger to
human life, health or safety, o r a riot or affray and may prohibit the
doing or continuance by any person of any act in pursuance of or
under cover of such resolution or order.
(2) Where an order is made under sub -section (1) a copy
thereof, with a statement of the reasons for makin g it, shall forthwith
be forwarded by the prescribed authority to the State Government
which may after calling for an explanation from the Zila Panchayat
and considering the explanation, if any, made by it, rescind, modify
or confirm the order.
(3) Wher e the execution or further execution of a resolution or
order is prohibited by an order made under sub -section (2 ) and
continuing in force, it shall be the duty of the Zila Panchayat or the
committee of the Zila Panchayat or the joint committee or any
officer or servant of the Zila Panchayat, or of the co mmittee of the
Zila Panchayat or to the joint Committee, if so required by the
authority making the order under the said sub -section, to take any
action which it would have been entitled to take, if the re solution or
order had never been made or passed, and which is necessary for
preventing any person from doing or continuing to do anything
under cover of the resolution or order of which the further
executions prohibited.
Extraordinary
powers of State
Gove rnment
towards 1{Zila
Panchayat } in case
of emergency 137 (1) In case of emergency the District Magistrate may provide
for the execution of any work, or the doing or any act which the Zila
Panchayat or Committee or Joint Committee thereof is empowered
to execute or do, and the immediate execution or doing of which is,
in his opinion, necessary for the safety or protection of the public,
and may direct that the expenses of executing the work or doing the
Act shall be forthwith paid by the Zila Panchayat.
------------------

(2) If the expense is not so paid the District Magistrate may
make an order directing the person having the custody of the Zila
Nidhi to pay the expense from such fund and such perso n shall act
upon such direction.
(3) The District Magistrate shall forthwith send a report to the
Zila Panchayat or to the prescribed authority in which cases he uses
the powers conferred on him by this section.
Separation from
their posts to the
officer s of the three
tiers Panchayat 138 (1) 1{The State Government may remove a Pradhan, Up Pradhan of Gram Panchayat or any of its member or any member of
Joint Committee or Land Management Committee or Pramukh or
Up-Pramukh of Kshettra Panchayat or any its me mber or Chairman,
Vice Chairman of Zila Panchayat or any of its member, on any of
the following grounds: }
(a) that he has acted as a member of the Gram Panchayat ,
Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchay at or member of any committee
by voting or taking part in the discussion of any matter in which he
has directly or indirectly, a personal interest or in which he is
professionally interested on behalf of a client, principal or other
person;
(b) that he has become physically or mentally incapacitated for
performi ng his duties as such member, Pradhan, Up Pradhan,
Pramukh, Up pramukh, Chairman, Vice - Chairman;
(c) that he has been guilty, whether in his present or an earlier
term of office, of misconduct in the discharge of his duty as such
member , Pradhan, U p pradhan, Pram ukh, Up pramukh, Chairman,
Vice -chairman or has contravened any of the provisions of this Act
or caused loss or damage to the fund or property of Panchayat s and
such misconduct, contravention or causing of loss or damage
renders due to cond uct of work as unauthorised in place by women
representative, her husband or family members or relatives, such
women shall be in eligible as member, Pradhan Up -pradhan,
Pramukh, Up -pramukh, Chairma n, Vice -chairman, in such case
they may be suspended upto the departmental final enquiry and
their work and duties may be hand over to a committee of three
elected members of the concerning Panchayat. In addition to the
disciplinary action also may be taken against the departmental
employees/ officer, if found gu ilty in the enquiry.
--------------------------------

1{(d) The Pradhan, Up -Pradhan or member of a Gram Panchayat or
any members of Joint Committee or Land Management
Committee, or a Pramukh, Up pramukh or any member of
Kshettra Panchayat or Chairman, Vice chairman or any
member of Zila Panchayat may also be removed from his
office in the following conditions -
(i) If he makes himself absent without sufficient cause
for more than three consecutive m eetings or
sittings or refuses to act; or
(ii) If he has taken the benefit of reservation under sub section (1) of Section 10 -A or sub -section (1) of Section 11,
sub-section (1) of Section 55 -A or Section 56 or sub -section
(1) of Section 9 2-A or Section 93, as the case may be, on the
basis of a false declaration subscribed by him stating that he
is a member of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
or the Backward Classes, as the case may be; or
(iii) If he suffers fr om any of the disqualifications
mentioned in clauses (a) to (u) of sub -section (1) of Section
8, clauses (a) to (u) of sub -section (1) of Section 53 and in
clauses (a) to (u) of sub -section (1) of Section 90.
2{(iv) No order shall be passed adversely affecting a
person to remove under this section by State Government/
prescribed authority shall not be given till the concerned is
given a reasonable opportunity to present the reason for the
thing.}
(e) No objection shall be made in any court on the order made
by the State Government under this Section.}
(2) 3{Notwithstanding anything in any other enactment, if any
member, Pradhan, Up Pradhan, Pramukh, Up Pramukh, Chairman
and Vice -Chairman is removed from membership under this section
he shall with effect from the date of publication of notification of
removal, cease to hold the office of member, Pradhan, Up - Pradhan,
Pramukh Up - Pramukh, Chairman and Vice - Chairman respectively
and a vacancy shall be deemed to have been created in that office. }
(3) A person who has been removed from membership of the
Panchayat under 4{***} of sub -section (1) shall b e disqualified for
being chosen a member of the Panchayat and being elected a
member, Pradhan, Up Pradhan, Pramukh, Up Pramukh, Chairman,
Vice - chairman of a Panchayats for a period of five years from the
date of his removal :
--------------------------------
4. Omitted by section 18(iv) of UK Act no 18 of 2020.

Provided that the State Government may, at any time by order,
remove the disqualification.
(4) Suspension - (a) If after the preliminary i nquiry, the Pradhan, Up
pradhan, Pramukh, Up pramukh, Chairman, Vice chairman found
guilty in prima facie than till the final inquiry, the State Government
may suspend him.
(b) If it is proved that the meeting o f Gram Sabha/ Gram Panchayat is
convened in the house of Pradhan / Up Pra dhan then after i nquiry
against the concerning person, the State Government may suspend
him;
1{***}
1{Provided that the preliminary inquiry shall be completed
within one month and the final inquiry shall be completed within
six months, as expeditiously as possible .}
Power s of State
Government to
dissolve the
Panchayats 139 2{If at any time, upon representation made, or otherwise, it
appears to the State Government that a Panchayat makes default in the
performance of any duty i mposed on it by or under this or any other
enactment, or exceeds or abuses its powers, the State Government
may, after calling for an explanation from the Panchayats and
considering any objection made by it to action being taken under this
section, and upo n being satisfied that resort to such action is desirable
by an order, with the reasons for making it published in the Gazette,
dissolve the Panchayats .}
Exercise of
powers and
performance of
functions
under the Act 140 (1) Every Gram Panchayat , Kshett ra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat shall exercise the powers and perform the functions
conferred and entrusted or delegated to it by or under this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this or any other law
for the time being in force Kshettra panch ayat or Zila Panchayat may
entrust to Gram Panchayat or Zila Panchayat to Kshettra panchayat
any of the function for the time being performed to such extent as
prescribed and may withdraw the function so entrusted like wise, the
State Government may, at an y time, entrust to any Kshettra Panchayat
or all Kshettra Panchayats or to any Zila Panchayat or all Zila
Panchayats any of the functions for the time being performed by any
of its depar tments below or at the district level and to withdraw the
function so entrusted.
(3) Where the State Government entrusts any function to the
Gram Panchayat , Zila Panchayat or Kshettra Panchayat under sub section (2), it may direct that any scheme, plan or project of the
concerned department shall also be transferred to, and implemented by
or under the control the Zila Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat, as
the case may be.
-----------------------

Power s to
inquire and
report about
the misconduct of
certain
officials 141 On receiving a complaint from any person residing within the
jurisdiction of a Gram Panchayat about any misconduct in the
discharge o f his official duties by any ameen process -server,
vaccinator, village chaukidar , patwari , patrol and tube -well operator
of the Irrigation Department, forest guard, forest chaukidar, teacher
of a primary school, pound -keeper, village stockman , Gram Vikas
Adhikari, Aaganbadi Karyakatri, Shayeka, Asha Karyakat ri or peon
of any Government department etc. , such Gram Panchayat may, if
there be prima facie evidence, forward the complaint to the proper
authority with its own report. The authority shall, after such further
enquiry as may be required take suitable ac tion and inform the Gram
panchayat of the result.
Bar of constitution
of the parallel
institutions in the
Panchayats 142 (a) The parallel institutions for perform the duties and exercise the
powers may not be constituted under the provisions of this Act,
which powers and duties assigned to the Panchayats.
(b) If any voluntary institution want to take welfare and development
related programes under any Panchayat area than the selection of
planning of such institutions and for their conduct, as resolution
of consent of the concerning Panchayat shall be taken.
Power s of
Panchayats to co operate with other
authorities and to
assist institutions
not managed by it 143 The Panchayats may, subject to any rules made in this behalf -
(a) unite with any other' Panchayats as the case may be, or other
local authority in works or undertakings which benefit all the areas
controlled by it and such authority;
1{(b) Contribute in such work or institution, which benefits block
or district, in spite of the work done outside the block or district,
whether institution is reserved outside the block or district or it is
within the area of any Nagar Nigam, Nagar Palika Parished, Nagar
Panchayat, Cantonment Board, notified area, town area .}
Exercise of power s
and performan ce of
functions of
Panchayat 144 The powers, duties and functions specified in with the exception of
those against which an entry is shown in the that Schedule d may be
exercised and shall be performed by a Gram Panchayat , Kshettra
Panchayat and Zila Panch ayat by resolution passed at a meeting
and not otherwise .
Power s and duties of
Committees 145 The duties and powers of establish Committees of the Gram
Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat shall be
following -
(1) Planning and Development Comm ittee shall perform duties
and exercise powers of the concerning works from following
subjects -
--------------------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 30 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(a) to keep knowledge on the financial subject of the concerning
panchayat and creation the source of income;
(b) to prepare annual work planning for the concerning
Panchayat;
(c) to place for sanction with prepare expenditure of the
concerning panchayat;
(d) to implementation o f the concerning prog rams of
Agriculture, Animal husbandry and poverty abolish en;
(e) related matters to the rural fairs and festival s;
(2) Education Committee shall perform duties and exercise
powers of the concerning works from following subjects -
(a) Basic education, Adult education , informal education and
literacy work;
(b) to maintain valuation of school buildings constructions/
repairing and selection of land for School buildings;
(c) entry number 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21related matters of 11th
Schedule of the Constitu tion.
(3) Construction Committee shall perform duties and exercise
powers of the concerning works from following subjects -
(a) to maintain all types of construction work;
(b) to ensure valuation of construction work of all types under
the concerning Panch ayat;
(c) related to the essential labour contribution .
(4) Health and welfare Committee shall perform duties and
exercise powers of the concerning works from following
subjects -
(a) entry number 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27 related matters of 11th
schedule of the Constitution,
(b) to implementation of the concerning programmes related to
medical, health and family planning and social welfare
specially women a nd child welfare, Aaganbadi, PHC/
CHC .
(5) Administrative Committee shall perform duties and exercise
powers of the concerning works from following subjects -
(a) all related matters to the establishment of employees of the
concerning Panchayat,
(b) related matters to the public distribution system.
------------------------------------

(6) Water Managem ent and Bio -diversity Management
Committee shall perform duties and exercise powers of the
concerning works from following subjects -
(a) to, proper conduct and maintain of tube well and drinking
water schemes;
(b) to, remedy of environmental safety in the population area,
(c) to, maintain different type of lands, tra ditional mattes and
cultivation to knowledge of storing of cattle’s and minor
lives and diversity related matters.
Delegation of
powers by State
Government 146 The State Government may del egate all or any of its powers under
this Act to any officer or prescribed authority subordinate to it
Gram Panchayat, Kshettra P anchayat and Zila Panchayat subject to
such conditions and restricti ons as it may deem fit to impos .
Penalty for
infringement of the
provisions of the Act 147 Whoever contravenes variour section or any provision s of this Act
shall be punishable, unless otherwise prescribed, with fine, which
may extend to five hundred rupees (Rs.500) , or as may be
prescribed and when the breach is a continuing one with a further
fine which may extend to fifty rupees or as may be prescribed for
every day after the first conviction during which an offender is
proved to have persisted in the offence .
Penalty for
contravention of any
order regarding
requisition 148 Whoever contravenes any order made under variour sections of
this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two year or with fine or with both.
Infringement of
rules and
bye-laws 149 (a) While making rules the State Government and prescribed
authority and while making a bye -laws may direct to Gram
Panchayat 1{Kshettra Panchayat or Zila Panchayat} that a breach
by any person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees and, when the bre ach is a continuing breach
with a further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for
every day after the first conviction during which the offender is
proved to have persisted in the offence, or, in default of the fine,
with an imprisonment which may extend to three months or as
may be prescribed .
(b) (1) The power s of the State Government to make regulations
under this Chapter is subject to the condition of the regulations
being made after previous, publication and of their not taking
effect until they have been published in the Gazette.
(2) Any regulation made by the State Government may be
general for all divisions or districts or for all divisi ons or
districts not expressly ex cepted from its operation, or may in
special for the whole or any part of any one or more than one
division or district as the State Government direct.
---------------------------------
1- Inserted by section 31 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(c) (1) The power s of a Zila Panchayat to make regulations shall
be subject to the condition of the regulations not taking effect
until they have, been confirmed by the State Government.
(2) The power s of a Zila Panchayat to make bye -laws shall be
subject to the conditions of the bye -laws being made after previous
publication and of th eir not taking effect until they have been
confirmed by the prescribed authority and, published in the Gazette.
(3) The prescribed authority in confirming a bye -law, or the
State Government in confirming regulation, may make any change in
its form that ap pears necessary.
(4) No alteration or rescission for regulation made shall have
effect unless and until it has been confirmed by the State Government
and likewise to alteration or rescission of by -law by a Zila Panchayat
shall have effect unless and unti l it has been confirme d by the
prescribed authority.
(5) The State Government may, after previous publication of its
intention, rescind any regulation or the prescribed authority may
similarly rescind any bye -law, which it has confirmed and,
thereupon, t he regulation or bye -raw shall cease to have effect.
(d) Where any notice issued under any section of this Act or under
any rule or bye -laws requires an act to be done, for which no
time is fixed by such section or rule or bye -law, the notice shall
specify a reasonable time for doing the same; and It shall rest
with the court to determine whether the time so specified was a
reasonable time within the meaning of this section.
(e) (1) Every notice or bill issued or prepared under any section
of this Act or u nder any rule or bye -law shall, unless it is in such
section or rule or bye -law otherwise expressly provided, be served or
presented -
(a) by giving or tendering the notice or bill, or sending it by post,
to the person to whom it is addressed, and
(b) if such person is not found, then by leaving the notice or bill at
his last known place of abode, if within the jurisdiction of the
Zila Panchayat or the concerned Kshettra Panchayat , as the
case may be, or by giving or tendering notice or bill to some
adult male member or servant of his family, or by causing the
notice or bill to be fixed on some conspicuous part of the
building or land, if any, to which the notice or bill relates.
(2) When a notice under this Act or under a rule or a bye -law is
required o r permitted by or under this Act, or under a rule or a bye law to be served upon an owner or occupier of a building or land, the
service thereof, in cases not otherwise specially provided for in this
Act, shall be effected either -
----------------------- ----------------

(a) by giving or tendering the notice or sending it by post, to the
owner or occupier, of if there be more owners or occupiers
then one, to anyone of them, or
(b) if no such owner or occupier is found, then by giving or
tendering the n otice to an adult male "member" or servant of
his family, or causing the notice to be fixed on some
conspicuous part , of the building or land to which the same
relates.
(3) Whenever the person on whom a notice or bill is to be served is
a minor, service upon an adult mal e member or se rvant of his
family shall be dee med to be service upon the minor.
(f) No notice or bill shall be invalid for defect of form.
Penalty for
tampering with the
Gram Panchayat,
Kshettra Panchayat
and Zila Panchayat
property 150 (1) Whoever removes, displaces or makes an alteratio n in or
otherwise interference w ith any pavement, gutter or other material of
a public street, or any fence, w all or post thereof, or a lamp post or
bracket, direction post, stand post, hydrant, or other such property of
the Gram Panchayat , without in written sanction of Gram Panchayat
or other lawful authority , shall be punishable With fine which may
extend to fifty (Rs.50) rupees or as may be prescribed .
(2) If through any act, neglect, or default on hi s part, a person
has incurred a penalty imposed by sub -section (1) and has caused any
damage to the property of a Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and
Zila Panchayat the person -incurring such penalty shall be liable to
make good such damages as well as t o pay Such penalty, and the
damages may be recovered from the offender in the prescribed
manner.
Disobedience to
notice issued 151 (a) If a notice has been given to a person under the provisions of
this Act or of any rule or by e-law made thereunder to a person
requiring him to execute a work in respect of any property, movable
or immovable, public or private, or to provide or do or refrain from
doing anything within a time specified in the notice, and such person
fails to comply with the notice, then -
(1) the Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat
may cause such work to be executed or such thing to be
provided or done, and may recover all expenses incurred by it
on such account from the said person in the prescribed manner
as arrears of la nd revenue;
(2) such person shall also be liable on conviction for the fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees and in case of
continuing breach, of a fu rther fine which may extend to ten
rupees for each day after the date of the first conviction durin g
which the offender is proved to have persisted in the offence
or as may be prescribed;
------------------------------------------

Provided that no notice shall be invalid for defect in form
or something has been missed.
(b) Unless otherwise e xpressly provided, no court shall take
cognizance of any of the offences punishable under this Act or under
any rule or bye -law, except on the complaint of, or upon information
received from, the Zila Panchayat or the concerned Kshettra
Panchayat or some p erson authorized by the Zila Panchayat or the
concerned Kshettra Panchayat by general or special order in this
behalf.
Appeals 152 (1) Any person aggrieved by an order or direction made by a
Gram Panchayat , Kshettra panchayat and Zila Panchayat under t he
Act or under any rule or by -laws may, unless otherwise prescribed,
within 30 days from the date of such direction or order, exclusive of
the time requisite for obtaining a copy thereof appeal to the
prescribed authority which may vary, set aside or conf irm the said
order or direction and may also award costs to or against the person
filing the appeal.
(2) The prescribed authority may, if it thinks fit, extend the
period allowed by sub -section (1) for appeal,
(3) The decision of the prescribed authority under sub -section (1)
shall be final and shall not be questioned in any Court of law.
Suspension of
prosecution in
certain cases 153 When an appeal has been filed against an order or direction any
proceeding to enforce such order or direction and any pros ecution for
the breach thereof may, by order of the prescribed authority, be
suspended pending the decision of the appeal, and if such order or
direction is set aside on appeal, disobedience thereof shall not be
deemed to be an offence.
Power s to
compound offences 154 (A) (1) Subject to any rule made in this behalf a Gram
Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat may, either before
or after the institution of any criminal case, compound an offence
against this Act or any rule or by e-laws made thereu nder on payment
of such sum in cash to the Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and
Zila Panchayat as may be prescribed.
(2) When an offence has been compounded the offender, if is in
custody, shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be
taken ag ainst him in respect of the offence so compounded.
All sums paid by way of composition under this section shall be
credited to the G ram Fund, Kshettra Fund and Zila Fund.
-----------------------------------------

(b) If through an act, ne glect or default on account where of a
person has incurred a penalty imposed by or under this Act or any
damage to the property of the Zila Panchayat or any Kshettra
Panchayat has been caused, the person incurring such penalty shall be
liable to make good such damage as well as to pay such penalty and
the amount of damage shall, in case of dispute, be determined by the
magistrate by whom the person incurring such penalty is convicted,
and on nonpayment of such amount on demand the same shall be
levied by di stress; and such magistrate shall issue his warrant
accordingly.
(c) (1) No order or direction referred to in section 1{152} shall
be questioned in any other manner or by any other authority than is
provided therein.
(2) The order of the appellate aut hority confirming, setting aside
or modifying any such order or direction, shall be final :
Provided that it shall be lawful for the appellate authority,
upon application, and after giving notice to the other party, to review
any order passed by him in appeal by a further order passed within
three months from the date of his original order:
Provided further that in case any order or direction referred
to in section 2{152} infringes the civil right of any person, he shall be
entitled t o question the said order or direction in any civil court
having jurisdiction in the matter.
(d) (1) If a dispute arise about the amount of compensation
which the Zila Panchayat or a Kshettra Panchayat is required by this
Act to pay, it shall be settled i n such manner as the parties may agree,
or in default of agreement by the collector upon application made to
him by the Zila Panchayat, the Kshettra Panchayat or the person
claiming compensation.
(2) Any decision of the collector awarding compensation sha ll be
subject to a right of the applicant for compensation to require
reference to the district judge in accordance with the procedure set
forth in section 18 of the Right to Fair Compensation and
transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resett lement
Act, 2013 (Central Act No.30 of 2013) .
(3) In those cases , in which compensation is claimed with
regards to land, the collector and the district judge shall, as far as
fallow such procedure or for proceedings in respect of compensation
for the acquisition of land acquired for public purpose prescribed
under the Act .
-------------------------------------------

(e) (1) If a disput e arise between a Zila Panchayat or a Kshettra
Panchayat and any other local authority on any matter in which they
are j ointly interested, such dispute shall the referred to the State
Government whose decision shall be final.
(2) The State Government may regulate by rule the relations to be
observed between Zila Panchayats and Kshettra Panchayat and other
local authorities in any matter in which they are jointly interested.
Civil suits against
Gram Panchayat,
Kshettra Panchayat
and Zila Panchayat,
their o fficers or
servants 155 (A) (1) No suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted
against a Gram Panchayat or Land Management Committee ,
Kshettra panchayat or Zila Panchayat or against any member or
officer or servant thereof or against any person ac ting under the
direction of any of these bodies or persons for anything done or
purporting to have been done in official capacity under this Act, Until
the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been
given , in the case of gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat delivered in or left at the office of the Gram Panchayat,
kshettra Panchayat , Zila Panchayat concerned and in the case of a
member, officer or servant or any person acting under his direction or
the direction of the, Gram Panchayt, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat delivered to him or left at his office or place of abode,
explicitly stating the cause of action, the nature of the relief sought,
the amount of compensation, if any claimed and the name and place
of abo de of the intending plaintiff and the plaint shall contain a
statement that such notice has been so delivered or left.
(2) No action such as is described in sub -section (1) shall be
commenced otherwise than within six months next after the accrual
of the c ause of action.
(3) No civil case or prosecution shall be entertained in any court
against a Gram Panchayat or any member or officer thereof or any
person acting under its or his direction in respect of anything in good
faith done or intended to be done u nder this Act or any rule or by elaws made thereunder.
(B) No civil court shall, in the course of any suit, grant any temporary
injunct ion, or made any interim order p rohibiting temporary
injunctions by civil courts against Zila Panchayat, Kshettra Pancha yat
or their officers –
(1) restraining any person from exercising the powers or
performing the functions or duties of a member, Chairman , Vice
Chairman , officer or servant or of a committee or sub -committee of a
Zila Panchayat or Kshettra Panchayat on th e ground that such person
has not been duly elected, co -opted or appointed as such member,
Chairman , Vice -chairman , officer or servant; or

---------------------------------------------

(2) restraining any person from exercising the powers and
perform ing the functions and duties of a member, Pramukh, Up Pramukh, officer or servant, of Kshettra Panchayat or of a committee
or sub -committee of a Kshettra Panchayat on the ground that such
person has not been duly elected, co -opted or appointed such
member , Pramukh, Up -Pramukh, officer or servant; or
(3) restraining any person or persons, or any Zila Panchayat or
Kshettra Panchayat or committee or su b-committee of a Zila
Panchayat , or a Kshettra Panchayat from holding any election, or from
holding any elec tion in any particular manner.
Validity of
proceedings 156 Except as otherwise provided under this Act, a Gram Panchayat,
Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat or any committee thereof,
shall have power s to act, notwithstanding any vacancy in the
members hip or defect or irregularity in the enrolment of a member
thereof, shall be valid notwithstanding that there was any defect or
irregularity in the enrolment of any member or that some person, who
was not entitled so to do, was present or voted or otherwis e took part
in the proceedings, provided, however, that at least two -thirds of the
persons present at the time of the act being done were not disqualified
to be members.
Powers and
duties of police
in respect of offences
and assistance to
Panchayats
Every police officer shall give immediate information to Gram
Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat of an offence
coming to his knowledge which has been committed against this Act
or any rule or by e-laws made there under and shall assist al l members
and servants of the Gram Panchayat , Kshettra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat in the exercise of their lawful authority.
Finance commission
and Fund of
Panchayats 158 (A) Finance Commission - (1) The Governor shall, as soon as may be
within one yea r from the commencement of the Constitution
(Seventy -third Amendment) Act, 1992 and thereafter at the expiration
of every fifth year, constitute a Finance Commission to review the
financial position of the Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Zila
Pancha yat and to make recommendations to the Governor as to –
(a) the principles which should govern —
(i) the distribution between the State and the Gram
Panchayats, Kshettra Panchayats and Zila Panchayats of the
net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the
State, which may be divided between them and the allocation
between the Gram Panchayats, Kshettra Panchayats and Zila
Panchayatss of their respective shares of such proceeds ;
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees
which may be assigned to, or appropriated by the Gram
Panchayats, Kshettra Panchayats and Zila Panchayats;
-----------------------------------------------

(iii) the grants in aid to the Gram Panchayats, Kshettra
Panchayats and Zila Panchayats from the c onsolidated fund of
State ;
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position
of the Gram Panchayats, Kshettra Panchayats and Zila
Panchayats;
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission
by the Governor in the interest of sound finance o f the Gram
Panchayats, Kshettra Panchayats and Zila Panchayats.
(2) The Finance Commission shall consist of a Chairman and
two other members who shall possess such qualifications and shall be
selected in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Finance Commission shall determine its own procedure.
(4) The Chairman or a member of the Finance Commission may
resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Governor
but shall continue in his office till the resignation is accepted.
(5) A casual vac ancy in the office of the Chairman or a member
of the Finance Commission may be filled for the remaining period of
his predecessor.
(6) The Finance Commission shall have the following powers
for their performance of its functions; namely –
(a) call for any record from any officer or authority;
(b) summon any person to give evidence or to produce a
record; and
(c) such other powers as may be prescribed.
(7) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by
the Finance Commission under this s ection together with an
explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid
before both the Houses of the State Legislature.
(B) There shall be established for each Gram Panchayat a fund
called Gram Nidhi for each Gram Panchayat .
(1) All a mounts received from Gram Panchayat or in his behalf in
which loan taken from the State and Central Government or Kshettra
panchayat or Zila Panchayat and all income of all following type of
taxes shall be deposited in the village fund .
(2) The following received amount shall be credited to the Gram
Fund -
(a) The proceeds of any tax imposed under this Act;
(b) All sums ordered by a court or required under any law to be
placed to the credit of the G ram Fund;
(c) The sale -proceeds of all dust, dirt, dun g or refuse including the
dead bodies of animals, co llected by the servants of the Gram
Panchayat;

(d) Such portion of the rent or other proceeds of nazul property as
the State Government may direct to be placed to the credit of
the G ram Fund;
(e) Sums con tributed to the Gaon Fund by any Zila Panchayat or
other local authority;
(f) All sums received by way of loan or gift;
(g) Such other sums as may be assigned to the G ram Fund by any
special or general order of the State Government;
(h) All sums received by way of grants -in-aid from the
Consolidated Fund of the State.
(3) All withdrawal of moneys from the G ram Fund and
disbursement thereof shall be made jointly by the Pradhan and the
Secretary of the Gram Panchayat.
(C) There shall be established for each Kshettra Panchayat a fund
called Kshettra Nidhi.
(1) All amounts received by the Kshetra Panchayat or in his behalf in
which loan taken from the State and Central Government by these
Panchayats or subsidiary allocation is also be include shall be
deposited in the fund;
Provided that a Kshettra Panchayat or a Zila Panchayat shall
earmark parts of the fund received by it for a particular purpose for
that purpose and shall expend the same in carrying out that purpose.
(2) Nothing in this section shall affect any obligations of a Kshettra
Panchayat arising from a trust legally imposed upon or accepted
by it.
(3) A Kshettra Panchayat may receive such contributions in cash or
in kind as may be made by any persons for any work of public utility
and the Kshettra Panchayat shall, there upon, utilize the same
together with its contributions, wherever necessary , in executing such
work.
(4) Drawing and dispersing of all types of amount depositing of the
Kshettra Fund and all works on behalf of Kshettra panch ayat and
reasonability of the proper disposal of constitutional powers shall be
Block development Officer inter allia as may be appoint by the State
Government from time to time.
(D) There shall be established for each Zila Panchayat a fund called
Zila Ni dhi.
(1) All amounts received from Zila Panchayat or in his behalf in
which loan taken from the State and Central Government or Kshettra
Panchayat or Zila Panchayat and all income of all following type of
taxes shall be deposited in the District fund.
Provided that a Zila Panchayat shall earmark parts of the
fund received by it for a particular purpose for that purpose and shall

expend the same in carrying out that purpose.
(2) Nothing in this section shall affect any obligations of a Zila
Panc hayat arising from a trust legally imposed upon or accepted by
it.
(3) A Zila Panchayat may receive such contributions in cash or
in kind as may be made by any persons for any work of public utility
and the Zila Panchayat shall, there upon, uti lize the same together
with its contributions, wherever necessary , in executing such work.
(E) A Zila Panchayat shall be deemed to be a local authority as
defined in the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914, (Act no 9 of 1914)
and shall be subject to all its provisions and the rules made
thereunder for the purpose of borrowing money under that Act.
(F) Application of fund - (1) The Zila Nidhi and all property vested
in a Zila Panchayat and the Kshettra Nidhi and all property vested in
a Kshettra Panchayat shall be applied for the purposes, express or
implied, for which, by or under this or any other enactment, powers
are conferred or duties so or obligations are imposed upon the Zila
Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat, as the case may be.
(2) A Zila Panc hayat or a Kshettra Panchayat shall not incur any
expenditure for acquiring or renting land beyond the limits of the
district or the Khand, as the case may be or for constructing anywork
beyond such limits except --
(a) with the previous sanction of the St ate Government ; and
(b) on such terms and condititons as the State Government
may impose.
(3) the fund and property of a Zila Panchayat or a Kshettra
Panchayat shall be applied in the following order of priority --
(a) liabilities and obligations arisin g from a trust legally
imposed -upon, or accepted by the Zila Panchayat or the Kshettra
Panchayat ;
(b) the payment of establishment charges including contributions
to pension, provident fund and leave allowances;
(c) all sums due to the Government ;
(d) the repayment of, and the payment of interest on any loan
incurred under the provisions of the Local Authorities Loans, Act,
;
(e) any sum ordered to be paid from the Zila Nidhi or the
Kshettra Ni dhi; and
(f) the carrying on of the duties and obli gations imposed upon
this Act or under any other enactment .
-----------------------------------------

1{***} 159 1{***}
Members and
Officers
not acquire interest
in contracts, etc.
with Land
Management
Committee
(1) No member or office bearer of a Gram Panchayat or, Land
Management Committee shall, knowingly acquire or attempt to acquire
or stipulate for or agree to receive or continue to have himself or
through a partner or otherwise any share or interest in any licence,
lease, sale, exchange, contract or employment with, by or on b ehalf of
the Samiti concerned other than permission in writing of the Distric t
Magistrate/ Pargna Magistrate .
Provided that a person shall not be deemed to acquire or attempt
to acquire or continue to have or stipu late for or agree to receive any
share or interest in any contract or employment by this reason only -
(a) having acquired any interest or share before he became a
member or office -bearer ;
(b) having a share or interest in the occasional sale through
the Samiti concerned of an article in which he regularly trades up
to a value not exceeding Rs.5000 in anyone year.
(2) No Court or other authority shall enforce at the instance of
any person 's claim based upon a transaction in contravention of the
provisio ns of sub -section (1).
Joint Committee 161 (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, two or more Gram
Panchayats may combine by means of a written instrument to appoint
a joint committee consisting of their representatives, for the purpose of
trans acting any business in which they are jointly interested and may -
(a) delegate to such power s to the committee power s, with such
conditions as they may think proper to impose, to frame any
scheme binding on each such Gram Panchayat as to the
construction and maintenance of any joint work and as to the
power s which may be exercised by any such Gram Panchayat in
relation to such scheme;
(b) frame or modify rules regarding the continuation of such
committee and the term of office, members thereof and the met hod
of conducting proceedings and correspondence.
(2) If any difference of opinion arises, between the Gram
Panchayats acting under this section, it shall be referred to the
prescribed authority whose decision thereon shall be final.
(3) Where the prescr ibed authority so directs, two or more Gram
Panchayats shall appoint a Joint Committee under this section for the
joint discharge of any of the fun ctions specified in Sub -section (1).
(4) Where the prescribed authority so directs, two or more Gram
Panchay ats shall appoint a Joint Committee under this section for the
joint discharge of any of the fun ctions specified in Sub -section (3).
-------------------------------------
1- Omitted by section 33 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

power s to transfer
property 162 (A) (1) Subject to any restriction imposed by or under this Act, a Zila
Panchayat a Kshettra Panchayat or Gram Panchayat may transfer by
sale, mortgage, lease, gift, exchange or otherwise any property vested
in it, not being property held by it in trust, the terms of which are
inconsistent with the right so to transfer.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), a Zila
Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat or Gram Panchayat may, with the
sanction of the State Government, transfer any property ves ted in it to
the Government, but not so as to affect any trust or public rights to
which the property is subject ed.
(B) (1) Whoever makes any encroachment on any land belonging to a
Zila Panchayat in the territorial area of the Zila Panchayat, except
const ruction of steps over drain in any public street, shall be
punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees as
may be prescribed .
(2) An offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) shall be bailable
and cognizable .
(C) A Zila Panchayat or a Kshettra Panchayat may make
compensation out of its fund to any person sustaining damage by
reason of the exercise of any power s conferred or the performance of
any duty imposed by or under th is Act or any other enactment, by it or
by any person acting on its behalf under this Act, and shall make such
compensation where the person sustaining the damage was not
himself in default .
(D) (1) When special police protection is asked for from the Sta te
Government by a Zila Panchayat or a Kshettra Panchayat on the
occasion of any fair, agricultural show or industrial exhibition
managed by the Zila Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat or of a
cattle market or cattle fair controlled and regulated by the Zila
Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat, the State Government may
provide such protection and the said Zila Panchayat or Kshettra
Panchayat shall pay the whole charges thereof or such portion of such
charges as the State Government consider equitably paya ble by it.
(2) If the sum charged is not paid, the prescribed authority may
make an order directing the person having the custody of the Zila
Nidhi or the Kshettra Nidhi, as the case may be to pay the expense
from such Nidhi and the person shall pay it ac cordingly.
Contracts by Gram
Panchayat, Zila
Panchayat and
Kshettra Panchayat 163 (A) (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act a Zila Panchayat, a
Kshettra Panchayat and a Gram Panchayat shall have power s to enter
into contracts which may be necessary o r expedient for any purpose of
this Act.
------------------------------------------------

(2) All matters relating to the sanction, execution, variation and
discharge of contracts including the preparation and sanction of plans,
estimates and project s therefor shall be regulated by rules.
(3) If a contract is executed otherwise than in conformity with the
provisions of this Act or any rules framed for the purpose, it shall not
be binding on the Zila Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat and Gram
Panchayat .
(B) The following matters shall be governed by rules, namely­
(1) making of grants and loans ;
(2) the accounts to be kept by a Gram Panchayat , Zila Panchayat
or Kshettra Panchayat;
1{ (3) The manner of consultation by Zila Panchayat Planning
and Devel opment Committee with the remaining five committees
mentioned in section 112 and by Kshettra Panchayat Planning and
development committee with the remaining five committees
mentioned in section 74 of the Act.}
(4) the manner in which such accounts shall b e audited and
published and the powers of auditors about disallowance and
recommending against members and officers or servants of the Zila
Panchayat or the Kshettra Panchayat in respect of loss, waste or
misuse of any fund or property of the Zila Panchaya t or Kshettra
Panchayat occasioned by the negligence of misconduct of such
member, officer or servant;
(5) the date before which a meeting shall be held for the sanction
of the budget;
(6) the methods and forms to be adopted in the preparation of
budg ets;
(7) the returns, statements and reports to be submitted by the Zila
Panchayat or a Kshettra Panchayat; and
(8) travelling allowance including daily allowance that may be
paid to Chairman , Vice Chairman , Pramukh Up -Pramukh and
members of Zila Panc hayat or a Kshettra Panchayat.

-------------------------------------

Continuance of
imposition of
Circumstances and
property Tax 164 (1) Where immediately before the appointed date there was any tax is
in force on Circumstances and Property in any district , which is
imposed or continue under the United Prov inces District Boards
Act, 1922 (Act no 10 of 1922) such tax shall until abolished or
altered with the previous sanction of the State Government ,
continue to be levied by the Zila Panchayat at the same rates and
under the same conditions at and under which it was being levied
under the Act aforesaid and notwithstanding anything , all rules
regulations and bye -laws, all orders and notifications and all
appointments relating to the levy of such taxes in force on the
appointed date shall continue in force as if they 1{have been made ,
given or done under this Act and may be cancelled, altered or
modified in accordance of the provisions of this Act }.
(2) Where a tax on Circumstances and Property is 2{not in force } in a
district immediately before the appointed date, the Zila Panchayat
of that district may impose such tax in the manner hereinafter
provided.
(3) The recovery of any arrears of the tax on Circumstances and
Property may be made under 3{section 180 to 184} , the manner of
recovery of such taxes and other dues shall be recover as arrears of
land revenue in the discretion of the Zila Panchayat.
Conditions and
restrictions for
tax on
Circums tances and
property
The power s of a Zila Panchayat to impose a tax on Circumstances
and Property shall be subject to the following conditions and
restrictions, namely -
(a) the tax may be imposed on any person residing or carrying on
business in th e rural area provided that such person has so resided or
carried on business for a total period of at least six months in the
financial assessment year;
(b) no tax shall be imposed on any person whose total taxable
income is less than fifty thousand rupee s per annum ;
(c) the rate of tax or the maximum limit of annual income, as fix by
the State Government and communicate to the Zila Panchayat
thereafter it may be imposed by the Zila panchayat in such case only ;
(d) the total amount of tax imposed on any perso n shall not exceed
such maximum estimated amount, if any, which may be prescribed by
the State Government by rule ;
Provided that for the purpose of this section taxable income
means estimated income but shall not include income of the following
classes : --
(1) "agricultural income" as defined in the Indian Income Tax Act ;
-------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 35 (i) of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(2) income on which any tax has previously been imposed of the
United Provinces Municipalities Act, 1916, by any municipal
board or any notified area committee.
Collection of
circumstances and
property
tax through
Gram
Panchaya ts 166 A Zila Panchayat may recover circumstances tax or other tax es, if any,
fee etc. through the Gram Panchayat . In such case, the appropriate
percentage of the recovered amount of tax etc. as per the decision of
Zila Panchayat, which may be fixed by the rules shall be payable to
Gram Panchayat .It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat to remit
the realizations to the Zila Nidhi within one week of such collection .
Framing of
proposals for
imposition of tax 167 (1) When a Zila Panchayat desires to impos e a tax, it shall, by
special resolution, frame proposals specifying -
(a) the tax, being one of the taxes described in section 179
which it desires to impose ;
(b) the persons or class of persons to be made liable and the
description of the property or o ther taxable thing or circumstance
in respect of which they are to be made liable, except where and
in so far as any such as or description is already sufficiently
defined under clause (a) or by this Act ;
(c) the amount or rate leviable from each such pe rson or
class of persons;
(d) any other matter referred to in section 126 which the
State Government requires by rule to be specified.
(2) The Zila Panchayat shall also prepare a draft of the rules
which it desires the State Government to make in respect of the
matters referred to in section 128.
(3) The Zila Panchayat shall, thereupon, publish in the manner
prescribed by rules the proposals f ramed under sub -section (1) and the
draft rules framed under sub -section (2) alongwith a notice in such
form as t he Zila Panchayat may, by regulation, prescribe.
Procedure
subsequent to
framing proposals 168 (1) Any person who ordinarily residing or carrying on business in
the district within which the Zila Panchayat desires to impose a tax,
may, within thirty days from the publication of the said notice, submit
to the Zila Panchayat an objection in writing, to all or any of the
proposals framed under the preceding section and the Zila Panchayat
shall take any objection so submitted into consideration and pass
orders thereon by special resolution.
(2) If any 1{Zila Panchayat } desires to modify its proposals or any
of them it shall publish modified proposals and, if necessary, revised
draft rules, alongwith a notice indicating that the proposals and the
rules, if an y, are in modification as proposals and rules previously
published for objections.
-----------------------------------

Resolution of
Zila Panchayat
directing imposition
of tax 169 (1) Upon receipt of the copy of the rules sent under the preceding
section, the Zila Panchayat shall by special resolution direct the
imposition of the tax with effect from a date, to be specified in the
resolution, not less than six weeks from the date of such
resolution.
(2) A copy of the resolution passed by the Zila Panchayat under
(3) Upon receipt of the copy of the resolution, the State Government
shall notify in the Gazette the imposition of the tax from the date
specified under section 168 and the imposition of a tax shall in all
cases be subject to the condition that it has been so notified.
(a) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the State Government
may, by rule, prescribe such other or modified procedure for th e
imposition and alteration of any tax mentioned in sub -section (3)
as it may think fit.
(b) Exemption - (1) A Zila Panchayat may exempt, for a period not
exceeding one year, from the payment of a tax or any portion of a
tax imposed under this Act, any per son who is, in its opinion, by
reason of poverty, unable to pay the same, and may renew the
same exemption as often as it deems necessary.
(2) A Zila Panchayat may, by a special resolution confirmed by
the prescribed authority exempt from the payment of a tax, or any
portion of a tax, imposed under this Act, any person or class of
persons or any property or description of property.
(3) The State Government may, by order, exempt from the
payment of a tax, or any portion of a tax, imposed under this Act, any
persons or class of persons or any property or description of property.
Power s of State
Government to
remedy or abolish a
tax 170 (1) Whenever it appears, on complaint made or otherwise to the State
Government that the levy of any tax imposed by a Zila Panchayat is
contrary to the public interest or that any tax is unfair in its incidence,
the State Government may, after considering the explanation of the
Zila Panchayat, by order require the Zila Panchayat to take measures,
within a time to be specified in the order, for the removal of any
defect which it considers to exist in the tax or in the method of
assessing or collecting the tax.
(2) Upon the failure or inability of the Zila Panchayat to comply, to
the satisfaction of the State Government with an order made under
sub-section (1), the State Government may, by notification, suspend
the levy of the tax, or of any portion thereof or may abolish or reduce
the tax until the defect is removed .
Obligation to
disclose liability 171 (A) (1) A Zila Pancha yat may, through communication by written
order to any person specified in aforesaid sections, to furnish such
information as may be necessary in order to ascertain --

(a) whether such a person is liable to pay a tax assessed on
his Circumstances and Proper ty;
(b) at what amount he should be assessed; and
(c) the annual value of the building or land, which he
occupies and the name and address of the owner.
(2) In respect of any other tax, a Zila Panchayat may, through
communication, by written order requi re any person who may appear
to be liable to payment of such tax and such information to furnish
as may be prescribed by rule.
(3) If the person so called upon to furnish the information omits
to furnish it, or furnishes information which is untrue, he s hall be
liable upon conviction to a fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees.
(B) Subject to the conditions and restriction in this section, Chairman
of Zila Panchayat and Chief officer and any other member, officer or
servant of the Zila Panchayat by the resolution, hereby authorised to
enter in to any building to inspect, measure and e valuate it.
Appeal relating to
tax 172 (1) An appeal against an assessment or any alteration of any
assessment, of a tax on Circumstances and Property may be made to,
and decided by the prescribed authority in such manner as may be
prescribed by rules.
(2) In the case of any tax imposed by the Zila Panchayat under the
powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 169 the State
Government shall provide by rules authori ty to whom an appeal may
be made against assessment or any alteration of an assessment of the
tax and the manner in which such appeal is to be made and decided.
Limitation and
preliminary deposit
of tax claimed 173 No such appeal shall be heard and deter mined unless -
(a) the appeal is brought within thirty days next after the date of
the receipt of notice of assessment or alteration of assessment, or, if
no notice has been given within thirty days next after the date of the
first demand under the assessm ent or alteration of assessment ; and
(b) where any amount is claimed from the appellant as may be
prescribed by State Government , half of that amount has been
deposited by him in the office of the Zila Panchayat.
Cost 174 (1) In every appeal made under section 171, the appealate athority as
prescribed under the rule s hall have power s to provide cost of appeal
in its discretion .
(2) Costs awarded under this section to the Zila Panchayat shall be
recoverable by the Zila Panchayat in the manner provided by section
172.
(3) If the Zila Panchayat fails to pay the costs awa rded to the
appellant within twenty days after the date of the communication to
the Zila Panchayat of the order for payment thereof the officer
awarding the costs may order the person having the custody of the

balance of the Zila Nidhi to pay the amount and the person shall pay
it accordingly.
Bar to
jurisdiction of
civil and
criminal court
in matters of
taxation 175 (1) No objection shall be taken for any valuation or assessment from
such other manner or by such authority, which is not provided by or
under this Act or for the assessment or imposition of the tax on any
person .
(2) The order of the appellate authority confirming, setting aside or
modifying an order in respect of calcu lation or assessment or liability
to assessment or taxation shall be final;
Provided that it shall be lawful for the appellate authority,
upon application or on his own motion, to review any order passed by
him in appeal by further order passed with in three months from the
date of his original order.
Savings 176 No assessment list or other list, notice, bill or other such document
specifying or purporting to specify with reference to any tax, charge,
rent or fee to any person, property, thing or ci rcumstances shall not
be invalid by reason only of a mistake in the name, residence, place
of business or occupation of person or in the description of the
property, thing or circumstance s, or by reason of any clerical error or
defect of form; and it shall be sufficient that the person, property,
thing or circumstance is described sufficiently for the purpose of
identification and it shall not be necessary to name the owner or
occupier of any property liable in respect of a tax.
Rules as to
assessment,
collection or
other matter 177 The following matters shall be governed by rules except in so far as
provision s therefor is made by this Act, n amely -
(a) the assessment and collection of taxes;
(b) the prevention of evasion of taxes ;
(c) the system by w hich refund of taxes shall be allowed and
paid;
(d) the fees for notice demanding payments on account of tax
on Circumstances and Property and for the execution of warrants
of distress ;
(e) the rates to be charged for maintaining livestock distained ;
(f) any other matter relating to taxes in respect of which this
Act makes no or insufficient provision s and which is in the opinion
of the State Government necessary; and
(g) the power s relating to allotment of number of building to
the establi shed buildings in the area.
------------------------------

Share of Gram
Panchayat in
taxes 178 If the Zila Panchayat decides to recover its any tax, fee or fine through
the Gram Pan chayat by resolution then by the Gram Panchayat within
its jurisdic tion determined pe rcentage of recovered amount which is
fixed by the rules shall be given to the Gram panchayat.
Fees and tolls fees
for use, otherwise
than under a lease of
property of a Zila
Panchayat , a
Kshettra Panchayat
and Gram
Panchayat 179 (1) A Zila Panchayat , a Kshettra Panchayat and Gram Panchayat
may charge fees to be fixed by bye -laws or by public auction or by
agreement for the use or occupation (otherwise than under a lease) of
any immovable property vested in, or entrusted to the mana gement of,
the Zila Panchayat , the Kshettra Panchayat and Gram Panchayat , as
the case may be, including any public road or place of which it allows
the use or occupation whether by allowing a projection thereon or
otherwise.
1{(2) Such fee may either be levied along with the fee charged for
the sanctioned license or permission taken under the clause (a) of sub
section (2) of section 179 or may be recovered in the manner
prescribed in section 180 to 184 .}
(a) A Zila Panchayat a Kshettra Panchayat or Gram Panchayat
may charge a fee to be fixed by bye -law for any licence, sanction or
permission which it is entitled or required to grant by or under this
Act.
(b) With the previous sanction of the State Government, a Gram
Panchayat , Zila Panchaayt and Kshettra Panchayat may fix and levy
school fees, fee for the use of libraries and Sarais and Paraos, fees for
the use of, or benefits derived from, any of the works or institutions
constructed and maintained by the Gram Panchayat , Kshettra
Panchayat or Zila Panchayat, originally under­taken as famine
preventive or relief works fees for the service of bulls and stallions,
and for registration of animals, and fees at fairs, markets, agricultural
shows, and industrial exhibitions held under its authority or o therwise,
to which the public is allowed access and at which the Gram
Panchayat , Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat provides sanitary
and other facilities for the public and tolls for the use of bridges
constructed, repaired or maintained by theGram Panchayat , Kshettra
Panchayat and Zila Panchayat.
(c) Licence fees and tolls in respect of markets - Subject to any
rule made by the State Government in this behalf, a Zila Panchayat, a
Kshettra Panchayat and Gram Panchayat may impose in any market
establish ed, maintained or managed by it anyone or more of the
following fees or tolls :
(1) licence fees on brokers, commission agents, weighmen or
measurers practicing their calling within such markets;
-------------------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 36 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

(2) to ll on vehicles, pack animals or porters bringing goods for
sale into such a market;
(3) market fees for the right to expose goods for sale in such
market or for the use of any building or structure therein;
(4) fees on the registration of animals sold in market.
(d) realization of recovery imposed on fee and tolls by Panchayats -
(1) Any unpaid fees and tolls referred to in Zila Panchayat and
Kshettra Panchayat may be recovered in the manner presc ribed .
(2) Methods of Taxes and dues recoverable of Gram Panchayat -
All dues on account of the taxes imposed and other sums
payable to a Gram Panchayat under this Act shall be
recovered as arrears of land revenue.
Recovery of Taxes
and certain other
claims 180 (A) Mode of recovery of taxes and other dues - Unless otherwise
provided by this Act, taxes and other dues referred to in this Act may
be recovered b y the Zila Panchayat by distress , and sale of a
defaulter's movable property in the manner hereinaft er provided.
(B) Presentation of bill - (1) As soon as a person becomes liable for
the payment of -
(a) any sum on account of a tax imposed by the Zila
Panchayat, or
(b) any other sum declared by or under this Act or by any
rule or bye -law made under the Northern India Ferries Act,
(Act no. 17 of 1878) to be recoverable in the manner
provided by this Chapter, the Zila Panchayat shall, with all
convenient speed, cause a bill to be presented to the person so
liable.
(2) Unless otherwise provided by rul e, a person shall be deemed to
become liable for the payment of every tax and licence fee upon the
commen cement of the period in respect of which such tax or fee
payable.
(C) 1{Things to be specified in the bill} - Every such bill shall
specify -
(1) the p eriod for which, and the property, occupation,
circumstance or thing in respect of which, the sum is claimed,
(2) the penalty enforceable in default of payment, and
(3) the time within which an appeal, if any, may be preferred as
provided in 2{section 173}.
------------------------------------------

(D) 1{Demand Notice} - If the sum for which a bill has been
presented as aforesaid is not paid, into the office of the Zila
Panchayat, or to a person empowered by a regulation to receive such
payments, within fifteen days from the presentation thereof, the Zila
Panchayat may cause to be served upon the person liable for the
payment of the above said sum, a notice of demand in such form as
the Zila Panchayat may by regulation prescribe
(E) 2{Issuance of warrant} (1) If the person liable for the payment
of the said sum does not, within thirty days from the service of such
notice of demand either —
(a) pa y the sum demanded in the notice, or
(b) show cause to the satisfaction of the Zila Panchayat or of
such officer as the Zila Panchayat by regulation may appoint in
this behalf why he should not pay the same, such sum with all
costs of the recovery may be r ecovered, under a warrant caused
to be issued by the Zila Panchayat in such form as the Zila
Panchayat may by regulation, prescribe, by distress and sale of
the movable property of the defaulter.
(2) Every warrant issued under this section shall be signed by the
Chairman or by an officer to whom the Zila Panchayat has delegated
this power s by regulation.
(F) 3{Foreceful entry for execution of the warrant} It shall be
lawful for an officer of the Zila Panchayat, to whom warrant issued
under section 180(E ) is addressed, to break open at any time between
sunrise and sunset, any outer or inner door or window of a building in
order to make the distress directed in the warrant, in the following
circumstances and not otherwise --
(a) If the warrant contains a speci al order authorizing him in
this behalf; and
(b) if he has reasonable grounds for believing that the building
contain property which is liable to seizure under the warrant; and
(c) if, after notifying his authority and purpose and duly
demanding admit tance, he cannot otherwise obtained admittance;
Provided that such officer shall not enter or break open the
door of an apartment appropriated for women until he has given any
woman therein an opportunity to withdraw.
(G)4{Manner of ex ecution of the warrant} (1) It shall also be
lawful for the officer mentioned to distain , wherever It may be found
within the rural area, any movable property of the defaulter, subject
to the provisions of sub -section (a).
------------------------------- -------

(2) The following property shall not be distained -
(a) the necessary wearing apparel and bedding of the defaulter, his
wife and children, and his necessary cooking utensils;
(b) when the defaulter is an agriculturist, his implements of
husbandry, seed, grain, and such cattle as may be necessary to enable him
to earn his livelihood.
1{(c) Tools of artisans;
(d) Books of Account.}
(3) The distress shall not be excessive, that is to say, the property
distained shall be as nearly as possible equal in value to the amount
recoverable under the war rant, and if any articles have been distrained
which, in the opinion of a person authorized by to sign a warrant, should
not have been so distrained they shall all forthwith be returned.
(4) The officer shall, on seizing the property, forthwith make an
inventory thereof, and shall, before removing the same, give to the person
in possession thereof at the time of seizure a copy of the inventory signed
by him and a written notice in such form as the Zila Panchayat may, by
regulation, prescribe that the said p roperty will be sold as specified in
such notice.
(H)2{Sale of goods under warrant and application of proceeds} - (1)
When the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay, or when
the expense of keeping in custody together with the amount to be
recovered is likely to exceed its value, the Chairman or other officer by
whom the warrant was signed shall at once give notice to the person in
whose possession the property was seized to the effect that it will be sold
at once and shall sell it accord ingly unless the amount named in the
warrant be forth­ with paid.
(2) If not sold at once under sub -section (1) the property seized or
sufficient portion thereof, may, on the expiration of the time specified in
the notice served by the officers executing the warrant be sold by public
auction under the order of the Zila Panchayat, unless the warrant is
suspended by the person who signed it or the sum due from the defaulter
is paid together with all costs incidental to the notice, warrant and distress
and de tention of the property.

-------------------------------------------

(3) 1{The surplus if any, shall forthwith be remitted by money order ,
less postal commission, to the person from whose possession the
property was taken. If the amount so remitted is returned to the Zila
Panchayat by the post office, it shall be credited to Zila Nidhi, notice of
such credit being given at the same time to the said person, and if the
same be claimed by written application to the Zila Panchayat within
one year from the date of service of the notice, a refund thereof shall be
made to such person. Any sum not claimed within one year from the
date of such notice shall be vested in Zila Panchayat .}.
Procedure in case of
execution of warrant
against property
outside the rural
area 181 (a) 2{Issuing of warrant in respect of acquisition of movable
property of the defaulter} - If no sufficient movable property
belongi ng to a defaulter can be found within the rural area, the district
magistrate may, on the application of the Zila Panchayat, issue warrant
to an officer of his court -
(1) for the distress and sale of any movable property or effect
belonging to a defaulte r within any other part of the jurisdiction of
the magistrate, or
(2) In the case of action being taken under sub­section (a)
the other magistrate shall endorse the warrant so issued or and
cause it to be executed, and any amount recovered to be remitted
to the magistrate issuing the warrant, who shall send same to the
Zila Panchayat.
(b)3{Fee and expenditure} - A fee for every notice issued under section
4{180(d)} and distress made under 5{section 180(g)} or 6{181 (a) }and
the cost of maintaining any lives tock seized under the said sections
shall be chargeable at the rates respectively specified in such behalf in
rules made by the State Government and shall be included in the costs
of recovery to be levied under 7{section 1 80(e)}.
(c) 8{Saving }- No distress or the sale made under this Act shall be
deemed unlawful, nor any person making the same be deemed a
trespasser on account of an error, defect or want of form in the bill,
notice, warrant of distress, inventory or other proceeding relating
thereto.
Alternative power s
of bringing suit or
recovering as
arrears of land
revenue 182 (1) Instead of proceeding by distress and sale or in case of failure to
realize thereby the whole or any part of the demand, the Zila
Panchayat may sue the person liable to pay th e same in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
------------------------------------
5- Subs . by section 38(B) (i ii)of Uk Act no 12 of 2021.
6- Subs . by section 38(B) (i v)of Uk Act no 12 of 2021.
7- Subs . by section 38(B) (v)of Uk Act no 12 of 2021.

1{(2) In the case of an arrear of tax on circumstances and property,
the Zila Panchayat may in addition to take proceeding under the
provisions of clause (b) of section 180 or sub section (1) of this
section, but subject to and in ac cordance with the rules made in
this behalf may recover as arrears of land revenue .}
Recovery of
rent on land 183 Where any sum is due on account of rent from a person to a Zila
Panchayat in respect of the land vested in or entrusted to the
management of the Zila Panchayat, the Zila Panchayat subject to and
in accordance with rules made in this behalf may recover any such
arrear as arrear of land revenue.
Recovery of
rent or arrears for
other
immovable property 184 Any arrears or rent due on any perso n on any account to the Zila
Panchayat in respect of immovable property, other than land vested
in or entrusted to the management of the Zila Panchayat, shall be
recovered in the manner pr escribed .
Delegation of
powers by State
Government 185 The State G overnment by notification in Gazette may delegate any
power s or more powers vested under this Act to prescribed authority
or of the Zila Panchayat or Zila Panchayats or Kshettra Panchayat or
Kshet tra Panchayats or Gram Panchayats.
Facility of inspection
of minute books and
tax assessment lists 186 The minute books of the Gram Panchayat , Kshettra Panchayat and
Zila Panchayat and the assessment lists of the Zila Panchayat shall be
open for free of charge inspection by any tax payer under con ditions
to be pr escribed by bye -laws in this behalf.
Mode of proof of
records of
Panchayats 187 2{A copy of any receipt, application, plan, notice, order, entry in a
register or other document in the possession of Gram Panchayat,
Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat s hall, if duly certified by the
legal keeper thereof or other person authorised in this behalf, be
admitted as prima facie evidence of the entry or existence of such
document and the matter and transactions therein recorded in every
case wherein to the same extent as, the original entry or document
would, if produced have been admissible to prove such matters .}
Restriction on the
summoning of
servants of
Panchayats to
produce documents 188 No officer or servant of a Gram Panchayat , Kshettra Panchayat and
Zila Panchayat shall in any legal proceeding to which the Gram
Panchayat , Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat is not a party, be
required to produce any register or document, the contents of which
can be proved under the preceding section by a certified co py, or to
appear as a witness to prove the matters and transactions recorded
therein unless by the order of the court made for special cause.
-----------------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 39 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.
2- Substi tuted by section 40 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

Inspection of
construction works
and registers of
Panchayats by
members 189 Any member of a Gram Panchayat , Kshettra Panchayat and Zila
Panchayat may inspect any constraction work or institution constructed
or maintained, in whole or part, the expense of the Gram Panchat,
Kshettra Panchayat and Z ila Panchayat, as the case may b e, and with
the previous sanction of the Chairman any register, accounts book ,
or other documents in the office of the Gram Panchay at, Kshettra
Panchayat and Zila Panchayat as the case may be.
Sums due 190 1{All sums due to any Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchcyat or Zila
Panchayat, whether on account of any tax or any other account shall be
recovered by the Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Pa nchayat or Zila
Panchcyat, as the case may be, and for the purpose of such recovery
Gram Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat or Zila Panchayat, as the case
may be shall be competent to take any measure or institute any
proceeding which if would have been open to the Gram Panchayat,
Kshettra Panchayat or Zila Panchayat to take or institute, if the Uttar
Pradesh Panchayat Law (Amendment) Act, 1994 had not come in to
force.}
Establishment of
Nyay a
Panchayat 191 The State Government or the prescribed authority shal l divide Gram
Panchayat of a district into circles, each circle comprising as many
areas subject to the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayats as may be
expedient, and establish a Nyaya Panchayat for each such circle;
Provided that the areas of Gram Pan chayats within each circle
shall, as far as possible, be contiguous. The State Government shall
determined the number of members, election tenure etc. of the Nyay
Panchayt as prescribed manner;
Provided further that the Legislature of State may be prov ide to
develop as a village court to the Nyay panchayat as he deem fit.
Honoraria
and allowances 192 The Gram Pradhan, Up Pradhan, Members of Gram Panchayat ,
Chairman and Vice Chairman and Members of a Zila Panchayat and
the Pramukh and Senior Up -Pramukh s, junior Up Pramukh and
Members of a Kshetttra Panchayat shall receive such honoraria and
such allowances as may be prescribed.
Surcharge 193 (1) Every Pradhan or Up -Pradhan of a Gram Panchayat, or member of
a Gram Panchayat or of a Joint Committee or any other committee
constituted under this Act shall be liable to surcharge for t he loss,
waste or misappropriation of money or property belonging to the Gram
Panchayat as the case may be, if such loss, waste or misappropriation
is direct consequence of h is neglect of misconduct while he was such
Pradhan, Up -Pradhan, Member :
--------------------------------------
1- Substituted by section 41 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

1{Provided that such liability shall cease after the expiry of ten
years of such loss, waste or misappropriation or after the expiry of
five years from the date when the debtor ceases to his post,
whichever is later .}
(2) The prescribed authority shall fix the amount of the surcharge
according to the procedure that may be presc ribed and shall certify
the amount to the collector who shall, on being satisfied that the
amount is due, realise it as if it were an arrear of land revenue:
(3) A person aggrieved by the order of the prescribed authority fixing
the amount, of surcharge ma y, within thirty days of such order,
appeal against the order to the State Government or such other or
appellate, authority as may be prescribed.
(4) Where no proceeding for fixation and realisation of surcharge as
specified in sub -section (2) taken by the State Government or
prescribed authority may institute a suit for compensation for such
loss, waste or misappropriation , against the person liable for the
same.
Repeal 194 (1) The Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 and the Uttar Pradesh
Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat Act, 1961 (as applicable in
Uttrakhand State) is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the said enactment shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding prov isions of this Act.

--------------------------------------
1- Inserted by section 42 of UK Act no 12 of 2021.

Reason and Object

The Uttar Pradesh Panchayati Raj Act, 1947 for Gram Panchayat and the Uttar
Pradesh Kshettra panchay at and Zila Panchayat Act, 1961 for dealing with the connected
matters from Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat, were applicable in the former State
Uttar Pradesh. Both mentioned Acts are applicable with certain amendments in the State of
Uttrakhand sub ject to section 86/ 87 of Uttar Pradesh reorganization Act, 2000.
2. After the enactment of such Acts, there were done swirling efforts for the matters
connected with such Acts, to make them strong by making required amendments in the
Constitution of Indi a. It has been also emphasized to make Panchayats more powerful of
the consequent of such amendments.
3. The Uttarakhand is more sensitive than the former State Uttar Pradesh in various
matters of Panchayats. Apart from this, it has been suggested by the Government of India to
maintain minimum laws in place of plenty of laws. It shall be a big achievement in own to
have minimum law in sensitive matters like P anchayat. The challenge to keep the U.P.
Panchayati Raj Act, 1947 for Gram Panchayat and the Uttar Pradesh Kshettra Panchayat
and Zila Panchayat Act, 1961, which are applicable in Uttarakhand with certain
amendments, in one statute, while working in this direction, it, has been ac cepted by the
State Government and Thus, for dealing with the connected m atters of Gram Panchayats,
Kshettra Panchayat and Zila panchayat, after preparing only one Act, it is int roduced for the
consideration of Honorable Vidhan Sabha.
4. The proposed Bill achieves the aforesaid objects.
Pretam Singh
Minister