An
Act

to provide the horizontal reservation in public services and posts in favour of
the Women citizens , in addition to the existing, rese rvation applicable in the State
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by the Uttarakhand Legislative Assembly in the seventy third
year of the Republic of India as follows: -

Short title and
commencement 1. (1) This Act may be called the Uttarakhand Public Services
(Horizontal Reservation for Women) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th
July, 2001.
Definitions 2.

In this Act unless the conte xt otherwise requires,: -
(a) “Appointin g Authority” in relation to public services and
posts means the Authority empowered to make appointment to
such services and posts;
(b) “ domicile” means eligibility criteria determined in
Uttarakhand G.O. No. 2588/F/4/410/2001 dated 20
November, 2001 o r any other Government order in force at the
time of recruitment;
(c) “ horizontal reservation” means horizontal reservation
given to women candidates, in public service and posts as per
Government order issued from time to time by the State
Government ;

(d) “ public services and posts” means the services and posts
in connection with the affairs of the State and also includes
following posts and services: -
(i) Local Authority;
(ii) Clause ( A) of Section 2 of the Uttarakhand Co -operative
Committee Act, 2003 in which the h olding of State
Government is not less than 51 percent of share capital of
Committee ;
(iii) Any board or any corporation or any legal body
established by any central or Uttarakhand State Act which is
under the ownership or control of the S tate Government or
Government company defined in the Company Act, 2013, in
which the holding of paid up share capital by the State is not
less than 51 percent;
(iv) any educational institut ion under ownership and control of
the State Government or which re ceives grants in aid from the
State Government including a university established by or
under any Act of State of Uttarakhand , except any institut ion
established and administered by minority section specified in
clause (1) of article 30 of the Constitutio n of India;
(e) “women candidate” means such women citizen of India
whose domicile of origin is in Uttarakhand, but she has not
obtained permanent domicile certificate elsewhere or a women
citizen of India whose domicile of origin is not in Uttarakhand
but who has obtained a permanent domicile certificate in
Uttarakhand as per the G.O. No. 25/88/F 4/410/2001 dated 20
November, 2001 or any other Government Order related to
domicile , for the time being in force.
Reservation for
Uttarakhand
domiciled
women 3. (1) In direct recruitment in public services and posts, in the
vacancies to be recruited, 20 percent Horizontal reservation
shall be given till 24 July, 2006 and 30 percent after that in
the favour of concerned women candidates permanent ly
domiciled i n the State of Uttarakhand .
(2) In public services and posts, horizontal reservation for the
women candidates domiciled in the State of Uttarakhand
belonging to Schedule d Caste s, Scheduled Tribes, Other
Backward Classes, Economically weaker sections and other
categories shall be in accordance with the order of
Uttarakhand Government in force at the time of recruitment :
Provided that if suitable women candidates are not
available on the posts reserved for women under the State
services, those posts shall not be carried forward rather, it
shall be filled with qualified male candidates coming in the
order of proficiency of the same category.
Responsibility
and power for
compliance of
Act
4. (1) The State Government may, by notified order entru st the
responsibility to any Appointing Authority or any officer or
employee for ensuring the compliance of the provisions of this
Act.
(2) The State Government may, by notified order vest such
power or authority to the Appointing Authority or officer or
employee referred in sub section (1) , as may be necessary for
effective discharging of the responsibility entrusted to him
under sub section (1).
Power to call
record 5. If it comes to the notice of the State Government, that any
women candidate defined in sub -section (e) of section 2 has
been adversely affected on account of non compliance of the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or the
Government orders issued in this behalf by the Appointing
Authority, it may call for such records an d take such actions as
it may consider necessary.

Power to issue
domicile
certificate 6. For the purposes of horizontal reservation provided under this
Act, a domicile certificate for women candidates shall be
issued by such authority or officer and in such manner and
such form as the State Government may, by order, provide :
Provided that, the said Domicile certificate shall be
issued by officer not below the rank of Tahsildar, following
the proper procedure after carefully verifying the all relevant
rules.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith 7. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against
State Government or any person, for anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done, in pursuance of this
Act or rule s made thereunder.
Laying of
orders etc. 8. Every order made under Section 3 and Section 4 shall be laid,
as soon as may be, before State Legislative Assembly and the
provisions of sub section (1) of Section 23A of the Uttar
Pradesh General Clauses Act, 1904 (as applicable to the State
of Uttarakhand ) shall apply as they apply in respect of the
rules made by the State Government under any Uttarakhand
Act.
Savings 9. (1) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to cases in which
the selection process has been initiated before the
commencement of this Act and such cases, deemed to be dealt
in accordance with the provisions of law and Government
orders as they stood before such Commencement;
Explanation - For the purpose s of this sub section the
selectio n process shall be deemed to be initiated, where under
relevant service rules, recruitment is to be made, on the basis
of :-
(i) written exam or interview only, the written exam or
interview, as the case may be, has been initiated , or
(ii) both written e xam and interview, the written exam has
been initiated .
(2) The provisions of this Act shall not be apply to the
appointment, to be made under “Uttar Pradesh Recruitment of
Dependant of Government Servants Dying in Harness Rules,
” and “The Dependant of martyr soldiers of Indian Army/
Paramilitary Forces (Permanent Resident of Uttarakhand) on
compassionate basis in State Services Employment Rules,
”.
Power to make
rules 10. (1) The State Government may by notification in the Official
Gazette, mak e rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) All rules under this Act shall as soon as may be after they
are made be laid before State Legislature while it is in session.
Overriding
Effects 11. Notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith con tained in
any other Act or Judgment/Decree/Order or directions of any
courts the provisions of this Act, shall be valid and effective.
Validation of
certain actions 12. (1) Anything done or purport to be done or any action taken,
under Uttarakhand Govern ment order no. 1144/Personnel/ -22-2001 -53(1)/2001 Dated 18 July,2001 and Government order
no. 1966/ xxx(2)/2006 Dated 24 July,2006 related to women
horizontal reservation, prior to the Commencement of this
Act, shall be deemed to have been validly done under the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Every order of appointment of a person as a officer, Judge
and every order of posting, promotion or transfer prior to the
Commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be validly
made under the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every power exercised and function performed every
matter deal t with, every proceedings, every order, judgement
decree or sentence passed and every other act done by the
officer, judge prior to the commencement of this Act shall be
deemed to be validly e xercised, performed, dealt with ,
undertaken, passed or done under the provisions of this Act.
Power to remove
difficulties 13. If any difficulties arises in giving effect to the provision of this
Act, the State Government may by notified orde r, shall make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provision of this
Act and as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficult y:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the
expiry of a period of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.

---