AN
ACT
to provide for better organization, development, discipline,
academic pursuit and control of the elementary .secondary and teacher
education institutions in the State for excellence and quality drive.
Whereas it is considered necessary to visualize tri-polar process­
teacher, taught and curriculum as well as to provide for the planned development
of educational institutions, inculcation of healthy educational practices,
maintenance and improvement in the standard of education and better
organization, discipline and control over educational institutions in the State
with a view to fostering the harmonious development of the mental and physical
faculties of students and cultivating a scientific and secular outlook through
education.
BE it enacted by the Arunachal Pradesh State Legislature in the Sixty­
first Year of the Republic oflndia as follows:-
CHAPTER-I
General
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement-( 1) This Act may be
called the Arunachal Pradesh Education Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
(3) It applies to all educational institutions and tutorial institutions in the
State except-
(i) Institutions for scientific or technical education financed by the
Central Government, and declared by Parliament by law to be
institutions of national importance;
(ii) Institutions of higher education which shall be deemed to be
University as declared by the Central Government by a
notification, under section 3 of the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956 (Central Act 3 ofl956);
(iii) In so far as the matters pertaining to colleges and institutions
are dealt within:-
(a) The Medical Council Act, 1956 (Central Act No. 2 of 1956):
(b) The Dentists Act, 1948 (Central Act No.16 of l 948);

( 6) Prescribe prudential norms including capital to risk
weighted asset ratio for all the Large Sized
Multipurpose Co-operative Societies in
consultation with National Bank.
148. ( 1) TI1e capital of25% State equity would be applicable State equity in
to State Co-operative Banks (SCBs) in the normal Co-operative
course but the State Government would be permitted Credit
to contribute equity in excess of this limit only if Structure.
equity infusion is required in the SCB to enable it
to comply with section 11(1) of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 (Act 10 ofl949).
There will be only one Government
representative on the Board of SCB. The CEO of
the SCB shall not be regarded as the representative
of the State Government. However, there will be no
Government nominee on the Board of PACS/
LAMPS/FSS irrespective of the State equity in such
an entity.
Provided that the State Government may
contribute equity in excess of the aforesaid limit
only if equity infusion is required in the State. Co­
operative Bank, to enable it to comply with section
(1) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (Central
Act 10 ofl949).
149. (1) No society in Co-operative Credit Structure shall Role of the
be exempted by the State Government in any manner State
from the application of the provisions of this chapter Government.
without prior approval of the Reserve Bank or the
National Bank.
The State Government shall not do anything
or take any action or issue any order or directive
which may have effect of curtailing any of the
freedoms or powers given under this chapter to the
societies in Co-operative Credit Structure or
adversely affect the operation of the provisions of
this chapter.
C.P. Mansai,
Secretary to the
Government of Arunachal Pradesh,
Itanagar.

(c) The Pharmacy Act, 1948 (Central Act No.8 of 1948);
(d) The Universities Act, 1904 (Central Act No.8 of 1904);
(e) The All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987
(Central Act No. 52 ofl987);
(f) The Indira Gandhi National Open University Act, 1985
(Centra1Act50ofI985);
(g) The Arunachal Pradesh Homoeopathic Council Act, 1998
(Act No. I of 1999);
(h) TI1e Arunachal Pradesh Health Establishment Act, 2002 (Act
No.3 of2002).
(iv) Such other class or classes of institutions, subject to such
conditions and to such extent as the State Government may,
by notification, specify:
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may,
by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for
different provisions of the Act.
2. Definitions: - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:-
( 1) "academic year" means the year beginning on such date as the State
Government or the prescribed authority may, by notification, specify
with respect to any specified location or with respect to any educational
institution or class of educational institutions ;
(2) "adult education" means the education or further education of a
person of not less than fifteen years of age who has not attended any
educational institution at any time before, or as the case may be, who
is a dropout from an educational institution at any level of his studies
therein;
(3) "approved school" means any school in any specified location imparting
elementary and secondary education which,-
(a) is under the management of the State Government or a local
authority; or
(b) being under any other management, is recognized by the State
Government or by an officer authorized by the State Government
in this behalf or by a school board as approved school for the
purposes of this Act;
( 4) "attendance authority" means any person having the prescribed
qualification appointed to be an attendance authority under

;

(5) "child" means a male or female child of the age of six to fourteen
years or as the State Government may specify for the purposes of this
Act either generally or with respect to any specified localities:
(6) "competent authority" means any person, officer or authority
authorized by the State Government, by notification, to perform the
functions and discharge the duties of the competent authority under
all or any of the provisions of this Act for such area or for such
purposes or for such classes of institutions as may be specified in the
notification;
(7) "commerce education" means education in typewriting, shorthand,
Book-keeping and accountancy, business studies, office practice and
procedure, salesmanship and marketing, banking practice, insurance
practice and such other subjects as may be notified by the State
Government;
(8) "commerce institution" means any institution imparting commerce
education and presenting students for examinations conducted by
the Central Board of Secondary Education Examination or the Council
oflndian School Certificate Examination or any such Board if any.
(9) "district" means any of the districts as declared by the Government
of Arunachal Pradesh under the Arunachal Pradesh (Re-organization
ofDistricts)Act, 1980 (Act No. 3 ofl980);
( 10) "District Education Officer" means an Officer appointed as Deputy
Director of School Education and includes such other subordinate
officer as may be prescribed to be in-charge of the administration of
the elementary and secondary education as well as non-formal
education in a district;
(11) "Director" means an officer appointed as the Director of School
Education to discharge the function and exercise powers of the
administration of secondary and elementary education or any such
Director by whatever name called to discharge the function and
exercise powers exclusively for elementary education in the State;
(12) "educational agency" in relation to a private educational institution,
means any person or body of persons which has been established
and is administering or proposes to establish and administer or is
entrusted with the establishment, management, administration and
maintenance of such private educational institution;
(13) "educational institution" means any institution imparting education
referred to in section 3 and includes a private educational institution
managed by an individual, body or local authority and is recognized

by the State Government; but does not include an institution under
the direct management of the university or of the Central Government
or a tutorial institution;
(14) "employee" means a person employed in an educational institution
or educational administration ;
(15) "general education" means every branch of education other than
religious, professional, medical, technical or special education.
( 16) "governing council" means any person or body of persons permitted
or deemed to be permitted under this Act to establish or maintain a
private educational institution; or commerce institution or tutorial
institution and includes the governing body, by whatever name called,
to which the affairs of the said educational institution are entrusted;
( 17) "grant" or·"grant-in-aid" means any sum of money paid as aid out
of the State funds to any educational institution ;
(18) (a) "managing committee" in respect of educational institution
established, maintained and administered by the State Government
means a committee at the school level with the composition-as may
be prescribed by the Government by notification from time to time;
and
(b) "managing committee" in respect of a private educational
institution means the individual or the body of individuals
entrusted or charged with the management and administration
of and where a society, trust, or an association manages one or
more than one such institution, includes the managing committee
of each such institution;
( 19) "medical education" includes education in modern scientific medicine,
in all its branches, Ayurvedic system of medicine, Unani system of
medicine, integrated system of medicine, indigenous medicine,
Naturopathy, Siddha or Homoeopathy and Yoga etc. ;
(20) "non-formal education" means the education, of a person upto fifteen
years of age who has not auended any educational institution at any
time before or as the case may be, who is a drop-out from an educational
institution at any level of his studies therein to enable him to enter the
formal educational system at an appropriate level ;
(21) "parent" means either natural or step or adoptive father or mother of
a child;
(22) "guardian" in relation to a child, means a person having the care and
custody of that child and includes a natural guardian or guardian
appointed or declared by a court or statute;

(23) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(24) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act ;
(25) "school" means any recognized school imparting education up to
XIIth standard ;
(26) (a) "inter village school" means a Residential Primary School in
which education is imparted by clubbing contiguous villages
with stipend and other facilities ;
(b) "primary school" means a school or part of such school in which
primary education up to V" standard is imparted ;
(27) "elementary education" means the education from class one to eighth
as are prescribed under this Act ;
(28) "secondary education" means education in and up to such class or
standard as may be prescribed under this Act ;
(a) "Secondary School" means a school or part of such school in
which education up to Xth standard is imparted.
(b) "Higher Secondary School" means a school or part of such
school in which education up to XIIth standard is imparted.
(29) "private educational institution" means any educational institution
imparting education referred to in section 3, established and
administered or maintained by any person or body of persons
registered in the manner prescribed and does not include an educational
institution;
(i) established and administered or maintained by the Central
Government or the State Government or any local authority
or any other authority designated or sponsored by the
Central Government or the State Government;
(ii) established and administered by any University established
bylaw;
(iii) giving, providing or imparting only religious instruction, but
not any other instruction ; or
(iv) imparting instruction for which there is no approved syllabi
or course of studies or Government or University Examination
(30) "private tuition" means instruction or teaching given by an employee
of a recognized educational institution outside its premises to
students;

(31) "public interest" includes public order, public health, public morality
and other similar purposes;
(3 2) "ragging" means causing, inducing, compelling or forcing a student,
whether by way of a practical joke or otherwise, to do any act which
detracts from human dignity or violates his person or exposes him to
ridicule by intimidating, wrongfully restraining, wrongfully confining,
or injuring him or by using criminal force to him or by holding out to
him any threat of such intimidation, wrongful restraint, wrongful
confinement, injury or the use of criminal force ;
(33) "recognized educational institution" means an educational
institution recognized under this Act and includes one deemed to be
recognized thereunder ;
(34) "registering authority" means any person, officer or authority
authorized by the State Government by notification, to perform the
functions and discharge the duties of the registering authority under
all or any of the provisions of this Act for such area or for such purposes
or for such classes of institutions as may be specified in the notification
(35) "secretary" in relation to a private educational institution means the
person, by whatever name called, who under the rules or regulations
of the private educational institution is a chief executive entrusted
with management of the affairs of the institution;
(36) "society" includes a society registered under the Arunachal Pradesh
Societies Registration (Extension to Arunachal Pradesh) Act, 1978
(Act No.6 of 1978) or Arunachal Pradesh Co-operative Societies
Act, 1978 ( Act No.3 of 1979 ) or any association of individuals
registered under any other law for the time being in force;
(37) "special education" means education for the physically challenged,
education in music, dance, drama, fine arts, and physical education
including sports and games and such other types of education as the
State Government may by notification in that behalf specify;
(38) "compulsory education" means enforcement of free and compulsory
elementary education in the State;
(39) "technical education" means any course of study in Engineering,
Technology, Architecture, Ceramics, Industrial Training, Mining or
any other subject, as the State Government may, by notification,
specify;
( 40) "tribunal" means the Educational Appellate Tribunal constituted
under section 93;

( 41) "tutorial institution" means a registered institution established or
run by not less than two persons for systematically imparting
education or instruction to not more than twenty five pupils at a
batch in any subject with a view to prepare them to appear for any
competitive examination or an examination in any branch of education
conducted or recognized by the State Government or the Universities
in the State or anybody or authority under this Act or any other law
for the time being in force.
( 42) "examination" means an examination prescribed by the State
Government and such other examinations as may be notified by the
State Government in the Official Gazette and includes evaluation,
tabulation, publication of results and all other matters connected
therewith;
(43) "refusal to work" in relation to any person to whom any work in
connection with any examination has been assigned means, his failure
to attend at, or absence from, the place of work on a working day and
during working hours, without obtaining permission of the authority
.competent to grant such permission or his refusal to do the work or
any other conduct on his part, which results in or is likely to result in
cessation or substantial retardation of the work, and the words " to
refuse to do the work", with all their grammatical variations and
cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;
( 44) "malpractice" in relation to any examination means taking or giving
or attempting to take or give any help from or to any person or from
any material, written, recorded, typed or printed or from any person,
in any form whatsoever.
( 45) "state institutions", that is to say, educational institutions established
or maintained and administered by State Government;
( 46) "local authority" means a municipal corporation or municipal council
or Zilla Parishad or Panchayat by whatever name called and includes
such other authority or body having administr~ve control over the
school or empowered by or under any law for the time being in force
to function as a local authority in a city, town or village ;
( 4 7) "local authority institutions", that is to say, educational institutions
established or maintained and administered by a local authority ;
( 48) "surplus fund" means all the monies that remains unused with the
institution at the beginning of each academic year, after providing for
all the objects, needs requirements or improvements of the institution
during the previous three academic years.

( 49) "transfer of property" includes sale, exchange, mortgage, charge,
lease or gift ;
(50) "persons interested" includes all persons claiming or entitled to claim
interest in the amount payable on account of the taking over of the
management of the educational institution or requisitioning or
acquisition of the property used for the purposes of an educational
institution or of any other institution connected therewith under this
Act.
( 51) Words importing the singular number also include plural number and
vice-versa.
(52) Words importing the masculine gender also include the feminine
gender.
3. Regulation of Education:-
(1) The State Government may regulate general education, science
education, commerce education, agriculture/horticulture education,
computer education, professional skill, vocational education, physical
education, art education, and special education in and at elementary/
secondary/higher secondary levels as are prescribed in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
(2) The State Government may towards that end,
(a) establish and maintain educational institutions on the line and
basis of all or any of the principle, guidelines, instructions, norms,
rules and regulations as may be deemed appropriate given by
the Council oflndian School Certificate Examination or Central
Board of Secondary Education or National Institute of Open
Schooling.
(b) establish and maintain Teacher Education Institutions on the
line and basis of all or any of the principle, guidelines, instructions,
norms, rules and regulations as may be deemed appropriate given
by the National Council for Teacher Education.
(c) permit any local authority or a private body of persons to establish
educational institutions and maintain them according to such
specifications as may be prescribed:
( d) require registration of educational institution including tutorial
institutions :
(e) recognize educational institutions;
(f) grant aid to any recognized educational institutions in furtherance
of the objects of this Act ;

(g) regulate the admission including the minimum or maximum number
of pupils to be admitted to any course in any educational
institution or class of such institutions, and the minimum age for
such admission.
(h) prescribe the conditions for eligibility for admissions to any
educational institution or class of such institutions.
(i) establish hostels or recognize private hostels and frame rules to
be followed for providing grant-in-aid to recognized private
hostels,
(j) permit or establish institutions imparting education in arts, crafts,
music, dance, drama or such other fine arts, physical education
including sports:
(k) permit and establish institutions for inter-village/primary,
elementary, secondary and higher secondary education, District
Institute of Education & Training (DIET), District Resource
Centre(DRC). State Institute ofEducation (SIE), State Council of
Educational Research and Training (SCERT) or centers for adult
education, non-formal education, National Institute of Open
Schooling (NIOS) and other similar institutions or centres;
(1) take from time to time such other steps as the State Government
may consider necessary or expedient.
4. Prohibition of private tuition: On and after the date of commencement of
this Act, no institution recognized or deemed to be recognized under this
Act, shall permit any of its employees to give private tuition nor shall such
employee impart such tuition to any person.
5. Promotion of education of the weaker sections and the physica_lly
challenged: The State Government shall endeavor to promote the education
of the physically challenged and the weaker sections of the society
including the economically weaker sections thereof and in particular of
the Arunachal Pradesh Scheduled Tribes with special care by adopting
towards that end such measure as may be appropriate.
6. Educational institutions to be in accordance with this Act: No educational
institution shall be established or maintained otherwise than in accordance
with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
7. Government to prescribe curricula, etc: (1) Subject to such rules as may
be prescribed, the State Government may, in respect of educational
institutions, by order specify :
(a) the curricula, syllabi and text books for any course of
instruction ;

(b) the duration of such course ;
( c) the medium of instruction ;
( d) the scheme of examinations and evaluation;
(e) the number of working days and working hours in an academic
year;
(f) the rates at which tuition and other fees, building fund or other
amount, by whatever name called, may be charged from students
or on behalf of students ;
(g) the staff pattern (teaching and non-teaching) and the educational
and other qualifications for different posts ;
(h) the facilities to be provided such as buildings, sanitary
arrangements, playgrounds, furniture, equipment, library,
teaching aid, laboratory, research and extension, workshops,
training, seminar, conference, symposia etc.
(i) such other matters as are considered necessary.
(2) The curricula under sub-section ( 1) may also include schemes in respect
of;
(a) moral and ethical education;
(b) population education, physical education, health education and
sports ;,
( c) socially useful productive work, work experience and social
service;
(d) innovative, creative and research activities;
( e) promotion of national integration;
(f) promotion of civic sense; and
(g) promotion of rich socio-cultural heritage and friendly people
character;
(h) promotion of socio-religious affinities;
(i) preservation and protection of tribal tradition, custom and their
skillful craftsmanship;
G) protection of fauna! bio-diversity;
(k) inculcation of the sense of the following duties of citizens,
enshrined in the Constitution namely; duty
(i) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and
institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem;

(ii) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our
national struggle for Freedom;
(iii) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity
oflndia;
(iv) to defend the country and render national service when
called upon to do so ;
(v) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood
amongst all the people of India transcending religious,
linguistic and regional or sectional diversities to renounce
practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(vi) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite
culture;
(vii) to protect and improve the natural environment including
forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion
for living creatures ;
(viii) to develop the scientific temper, human-ism and the spirit of
inquiry and reform ;
(ix) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence ;
(x) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and
collective activity, so that the nation constantly rises to
higher levels of endeavor and achievement.
(3) The prescription under sub-section ( 1) may be different for the different
categories of educational institutions.
(4) (a) The objectives of education at the elementary level shall be
universalization of education at the elementary level by
comprehensive access by both formal and non formal means and by
improving retention and completion rates with curriculum
development and teacher education to help children to attain the
required level of achievement in the following basic purposes.
(i) development of 'basic skills' in literacy in English language,
numeracy and communication;
(ii) development of 'Life Skills' for understanding of and
meaningful interaction with the physical and social
environment, including study of Indian culture and history,
science, health and nutrition ;
(iii) introduction of 'work experience' or 'socially useful
productive work' to provide children with the, ability to
help themselves, to orient them to the work processes of
society and to develop right attitudes to work ;

(iv) promotion of values including moral, ethical, civic and peace
values; and
(v) development of good attitudes towards further learning;
(b) The main objective of education at the secondary level shall be to
impart such general education as may be prescribed so as to
make the pupil fit either for higher academic studies or for job­
oriented vocational courses. The general education so imparted
shall, among others, include-
(i) the development oflinguistic skills and literary appreciation
in the regional language or local language.
(ii) the attainment of prescribed standards of proficiency in
any two other selected languages among classical or modem
Indian languages including Hindi and English;
(iii) the acquisition of requisite knowledge in mathematics,
physical and biological science with a special reference to
the physical environment of the pupil;
(iv) the study of social sciences with special reference to history,
geography, civics, economics, disaster management and
global warming so as to acquire the minimum necessary
knowledge in regard to the State, Country and the World;
(v) the introduction of 'work experience' or 'socially useful
productive work' as an integral part of the curriculum; and
(vi) training in sports, games, physical exercises, yoga and other
arts.
( 5) In every recognized educational institution.
( a) the course of instruction shall conform to the curricula and other
conditions under sub-section ( 1 ), and
(b) no part of the working hours prescribed shall be utilized for any
purpose other than instruction in accordance with the curricula,
( c) endeavour to regulate education of the pupils by the teachers
wherein
(i) the pupils are handled not by coercion but by persuasion
so that their tender age is not abused;
(ii) the pupils are taught in a friendly, conducive, cordial,
hygienic and congenial atmo :· '"' ·' 1';' adhering strictly to
the medium of instruction ir: prcci,« ., lucid, understandable
and simple language;

(iii) the pupils are not scolded. punished, slapped or beaten up;
(iv) the pupils are not segregated on the ground of caste, sex,
region, religion, community or grounds in like manners.
Cll.\PTER- II
Educational Authorities
8. Appointment of Officers:- (I) The State Government shall constitute as
many departments as it deems necessary to deal with the various aspects
of education and appoint Director or Commissioner for each department
or group of departments.
(2) The State Government may also appoint such number of officers as
may be necessary, designated as Additional Director, Joint Director,
Deputy Director or otherwise, for each department or group of
departments to assist each such Director in the exercise of the powers
conferred on and the performance of the functions entrusted to him
by or under this Act.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the general or special orders
of the State Government made in this behalf, the Director or
Commissioner appointed under sub-section (1) shall be the Chief
Controlling authority in all matters connected with the administration
of such part of education in the State as may be allotted by the State
Government by an order in this behalf to the department or group of
departments, of which he is the Director or Commissioner.
( 4) ( a) The Director or the Commissioner as specified in sub-section (3)
shall regulate the matters with regards to transfer and posting of
teachers in and from 'hard belt- or rural', 'middle belt or semi-rural
or semi-urban' or 'soft belt or urban' or by whatever name called
within or outside the districts/unit in an accountable and transparent
manner depending upon the requirement of teachers or availability
of vacancy in respect of educational institutions established,
managed, administered and maintained by the State Government as
may be prescribed.
Explanation : For the purpose of this sub-section :-
(i) hard or rural belt means school locations requiring foot
march of not less than one day or one stage ;
(ii) middle or semi-rural or semi-urban means school
locations with minimum available motorable road
connectivity ;
(iii) soft or urban means school locations with all weather
road connectivity and other amenities such as education
and health facilities etc.

(a) They may by notification specify the Uniform Education Code
with regards to the institutional planning. school discipline,
admission and examination procedures, maintenance of school
records and accounts, hostel administration, classification and
conduct of co-curricular activities, educational code of ethics,
pupil's fee, school uniform, common working hours etc. in respect
of educational institutions established, managed, administered
and maintained by the State Government as may be prescribed.
(b) They may frame appropriate service/recruitment rules for direct
recruitment, absorption, transfer on deputation, promotion
thereby streamlining the hierarchy of various teaching and non­
teaching posts of the education department by taking into account
the fulfillment of required educational qualification or such other
consideration as may be prescribed.
( c) They shall initiate steps to create a separate cadre of Teacher
Educators under School Education and frame appropriate
service/recruitment rules for direct recruitment, absorption,
transfer on deputation and promotion, thereby streamlining the
hierarchy of various teaching and non-teaching posts under
Teacher Education within the Department of Education by taking
into account the fulfillment of required educational qualification
or such other consideration as prescribed by the National Council
for Teacher Education.
( d) The post of teachers at elementary, secondary and higher
secondary stage of education shall be classified by
considering their professional qualification and teaching
responsibility.
( e) Depending upon the fulfillment of requisite qualification and
length of service with other norms, primary teachers who possess
such professional qualification as Diploma in Elementary
Education (D .El.Ed.) shall be considered for promotion and career
mobility to the next higher level teaching post.
(±) If the State Government is of the opinion that any employment
and officiating contract appointment be made on administrative
exigencies in relation to the educational institution managed and
administered by the State Government may, by giving to the
employee one month's notice in wrir. ·.:.. " ·-,1,w)' or wages for
one month in lieu thereof, terminar: such c ontract employment
and officiating services.

(5) The State Government may constitute such number ofVigilance Cells
at the State, Division and District levels as it thinks fit with such
number of officers as it deems necessary in each cell for each
department to perform such duties and functions as may be prescribed
for the proper observance of the provisions of this Act and rules
made thereunder.
(6) All persons employed in the administration of this Act shall be
subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the
State Government and the officer or officers to whom each officer
shall be subordinate shall be determined by the State Government.
9. District Education Officers and other subordinate officers and staff at
the district level. (1) The State Government may appoint for each District
one or more District Education Officers, and every such District Education
Officer shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be
entrusted to him by or under this Act.
(2) The State Government may sanction the appointment of such number
ofofficers and staff as may be necessary to assist the District Education
Officer.
(3) The appointment to the posts sanctioned under sub-section (2) shall
be made by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed.
( 4) The powers and functions of the officers and staff appointed under
this section shall be such as may be prescribed.
10. Constitution of Board/Commission/State Council of Educational Research
& Training:- (1) Consistent with clause ( a) of sub-section (2) of section
3, the State Government shall continue to follow all rules and regula~ions
of Central Board of Secondary Education and its Examination pattern till
such time an appropriate independent State Board is constituted.
(2) As and when the State Government feels it necessary and expedient,
may by notification, establish a Board of Secondary Education to be
called 'The Arunachal Pradesh Board of Secondary Education", the
composition, powers and functions of which shall be such as may be
prescribed. The functions of the Board shall include.-
Ca) advising the State Government on the co-ordinated development
of Secondary Education in the State, and
(b) the conduct of examinations, conforming to the minimum
standards as may be prescribed and the award of certificates.
(3) The State Government may further, by notification establish a Board of
Teacher Education to be called 'The Arunachal Pradesh Board of

Teacher Education," the composition and powers of which shall be
such as may be prescribed. The functions of the Board shall be to
advise the State Government on the courses of study, pre-service and
in-service training to teachers and to conduct examination of pre­
service teacher education and all other matters relating to teacher
education.
(4)(a) Also further the State Government may by notification constitute a
Board or a Commission to be called the "Arunachal Pradesh
Education Service Board" or the "Arunachal Pradesh Education
Service Commission". The Board or the Commission shall conduct
examinations for recruitment to the various teaching and non-teaching
posts up to the post of Group-B (Gazetted) as may be prescribed.
(b) The composition, powers and functions of the Board or the
Commission may be such, as prescribed.
(5) The State Government shall by notification establish the State Council
of Educational Research & Training (SCERT) in order to strengthen
and promote quality teacher education to meet the general need of
universal quality education in the State. For this purpose, the existing
teaching and non-teaching posts, infrastructure etc. of State Institute
of Education (SIE) may be absorbed as deemed appropriate in the
SCERT.
(6) The State Government furthermore may, by notification, constitute
such Board other than those specified in sub-sections (1) to (5), to
discharge such functions and to exercise such powers as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER-ill
Enforcement of Free and Compulsory Elementary Education
11. State Government to direct by notification Elementary Education to be
free and compulsory in the entire State-(1) The State Government may,
by order, direct that with effect from the commencement of such academic
year and for children with such age group ( 6-14) as may be specified in the
order, elementary education shall be free and compulsory in the entire
State:
Provided that a child who has completed the age of five years shall
not be denied admission into the school.
(2) Every order under sub-section (1) shall be.-
( a) Published in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the
State Government may decide ;

(b) So made as to ensure that there is an interval of not less than
thirty days between the date of the publication of the order and
the first day of the specified academic year.
(3) No order shall be made under sub-section ( l) in respect of school
unless the State Government is satisfied that necessary facilities have
been provided in that school for imparting elementary education to all
children.
12. Enforcement of provisions of sections 13 to 143 :- Subject to grammatical
variations and cognate expressions and references made in section 2 all
the provisions of sections 13 to 143 shall mutatis mutandis apply to all the
educational institutions established. managed. administered, controlled
and maintained by the State Government as may be prescribed.
I 3. Schemes for Free and Compulsory Elementary Education:-( 1 )Any local
authority, if called upon by the State Government so to do, shall within
such time as may be specified by the State Government submit to them a
sc liern e for free and compulsory elementary educ ar ion in such loc al iry
within its jurisdiction for children ordinarily resident therein, of such ages
and up to such standard as the State Government may specify.
(2) The Scheme submitted under sub-section ( 1 ), shall be in such form as
the State Government may specify and shall contain the following
particulars. namely.-
(a) The locality in which elementary education will be free and
compulsory;
(b) The approximate number of children to whom the scheme will
apply classified according to age.
(c) A list of existing approved schools and the schools if any,
proposed to be opened for the purpose, classified by languages
in which instruction is given or is proposed to be given:
(d) The number of teachers already employed and the additional
staff proposed to be recruited;
(e) The recurring and non-recurring cost of the scheme: and
(f) Such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(3) The State Government may, after such inquiry as it may consider
necessary, sanction with or without modification the scheme-submitted
by the local authority under sub-section (1 ). The implementation of
the scheme so sanctioned shall be subject to the general control of
and the directions issued from time to time. by the State Government.

( 4) No sanction shall be accorded under sub-section (3) in respect of
any scheme unless the State Government are satisfied that such steps,
as may be prescribed, have been taken to provide the necessary
facilities for imparting free and compulsory elementary education to
all children to whom the scheme will apply.
(5) On receipt of sanction under sub-section (3) the local authority shall
give effect to the scheme so sanctioned by means of a declaration
that with effect from the first day of the next academic year, elementary
education for children of both sexes up to such class or standard and
within such age - group as may be specified therein shall be free and
compulsory in any locality which may be so specified.
(6) Every declaration under sub-section (5) shall be published before the
first day of April of each year immediately preceding the academic
year, in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the local
authority or the Director of School Education, as the case may be,
may decide:
Provided that the State Government may, for any good and
sufficient cause, condone any delay in the publication of such
declaration in any year.
(7) Where any local authority fails to submit a scheme when called upon
to do so under sub-section (1) or to give effect to any sanctioned
scheme, under sub-section (5) to the satisfaction of the State
Government, the State Government may cause the scheme to be
submitted or the sanctioned scheme to be implemented as the case
may be, by such person or authority as they think fit. The State
Government may, at any time, entrust the administration of the
sanctioned scheme to the local authority concerned.
14. Attendance authorities and their powers and duties: -
(1) A local authority in the case specified under section 13 and in other
cases, the Director of School Education may appoint as many persons
as it or he think fit to be attendance authorities for the purpose of this
Act, and may also appoint as many persons as are considered
necessary, to assist the attendance authorities in the discharge of
their duties.
(2) It shall be the duty of the local authority and in any other case, the
attendance authority, to cause to be prepared as early as possible in
such manner as may be prescribed list of children within the age
group ( 6-14) specified in the order under section 11 or in the scheme
under section 13 in any locality. Such lists shall also be prepared in
every year in every specified locality at such time and in such manner
as may be prescribed.

(3) The attendance authority or any person appointed to assist the
attendance authority may put such question to any parent or enquire
any person to furnish such information about his child, as it or be
considered necessary. and every such parent shall be bound to answer
such questions or to furnish such information, as the case may be, to
the best of knowledge or belief.
(4) It shall be the duty of the attendance authority to notify the parent of
every child to whom the order under section 11 applies. but against
whom no attendance order has been passed under section I 8, that he
is under an obligation to cause the child to attend an approved school
with effect from the commencement of the specified academic year.
15. Responsibility of parent to cause his child to attend school- It shall be the
duty of the parent of every child to cause the child to attend an approved
school, unless there is a reasonable excuse for his non-attendance within
the meaning of section 16.
16. Reasonable excuse for non-attendance- For the purpose of this Act any of
the following circumstances shall be deemed to be a reasonable excuse for
the non-attendance of the child at an approved school, namely :-
(a) that there is no approved school within the prescribed distance
from his residence;
(b) that the only approved school within the prescribed distance
from the residence of the child to which the child can secure
admission is one in which religious instruction of a nature not
approved by his parent is compulsory :
( c) that the child is receiving instruction in some other manner which
is declared to be satisfactory by the State Govenunent or by an
officer authorized by the State Government in this behalf;
(d) that the child has already completed elementary education up to
the standard specified in the order under section 11;
( e) that the child suffers from a physical or mental defect which
prevents him from attendance :
(f) that the child has been granted temporary leave of absence not
exceeding the prescribed period by the prescribed authority or
by any other person authorized by the prescribed authority in
this behalf:
(g) that there is any other compelling circumstance which prevents
the child from attending school, provided the same is certified
as such by the attendance authority ; and
(h) such other circumstance as may be prescribed.

17. Special schools for physically or mentally challenged children.- If there
is in existence a special school within the prescribed distance from the
residence of a child who is suffering from physical or mental defect, the
attendance authority may, if it is satisfied that the child is not receiving
any instruction in some other manner considered by it to be satisfactory,
by order require the child to attend the special school; and it shall be the
duty of the parent of such child to cause the child to attend the special
school unless there be a reasonable excuse for the non-attendance of the
child within the meaning of section 16.
18. Attendance orders:- ( 1) Wherever the attendance authority has reason to
believe that the parent of the child has failed to cause the child to attend
an approved school and that there is no reasonable excuse for the non­
attendance of the child within the meaning of section 16, it shall hold an
inquiry in the prescribed manner.
(2) If, as a result of the inquiry, the attendance authority is satisfied that
the child is liable to attend an approved school under this Act, and
that there is no reasonable excuse for his non-attendance within the
meaning of section 16, it shall pass an attendance order in the
prescribed form, directing the person to cause the child to attend the
approved school with effect from the date specified in the order.
(3) An attendance order passed against a parent in respect of his child
under this section shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 6),
remain in force for so long as this Act continues to apply to the child.
( 4) If any parent against whom an attendance order has been passed in
respect of his child under sub-section (2), transfers the custody of
the child to any other person during the period in which the
attendance order is in force, such parent shall be bound immediately
to inform the attendance authority in writing of such transfer.
(5) Where the attendance order has been passed against a parent in
relation to his child under i his section, such order shall have effect in
relation to any other person to whom the custody of the child may be
transferred during the period in which the attendance order is in
force, as it has effect in relation to the person against whom it was
originally passed.
( 6) A parent may, at any time, apply to the attendance authority for
cancellation of the attendance order on the ground :-
(a) that he is no longer the guardian or the person in actual custody
of the child; or

(b) that circumstances have arisen which provide a reasonable excuse
for non-attendance;
and thereupon, the attendance authority may, after holding
an enquiry in the prescribed manner cancel or modify the
attendance order.
19. Children not to be employed so as to prevent them from attending school:­
No person shall employ a child in a manner which shall prevent the child
from attending an approved school.
20. Elementary Education to be free and compulsory:- (1) No fee shall be
levied in respect of any child for attending an approved school, which is
under the management of the State Government and subject to section 13,
the private/local body schools falling under the granted scheme for free
and compulsory education.
(2) Where in respect of any child an attendance order has been passed
under section 18 and the only school which he can attend is an
approved school under private management falling within sub-clause
(b) of clause (3) of section 2, the School Board or the Director of
School Education may take such steps, as he may think fit, for the
purpose of ensuring that the elementary education which the child is
to receive is free.
21. Age of child, how to be computed:- The age of a child for the purposes of
this Act, shall be computed in terms of years completed by the child on or
before the first day of the academic year:
Provided that where the birth day of a child falls on a day not later
than sixty days from the first day of the academic year, the birth day shall
be deemed to fall on the first day of the academic year for the purpose of
computing the age of the child.
CHAPTER-IV
Examinations and Prevention of Malpractices, etc.
22. Examinations :- (I) The examination/continuous and comprehensive
evaluation (CCE) system, whether by internal assessment, external
assessment or partly internal and partly external assessment, formative
and summative assessment shall be so regulated by the competent
authority as to make it a reliable and effective method of student evaluation.
(2) The Govenunent may make rules for all matters connected with the
implementation of the examination/CCE system and the conduct of
examination and the pattern of examination system to which different
classes of Government recognized schools should conform.

sos
(3) Existing rules and regulations of examination pattern of Central Board
of Secondary Education (CBSE) will remain same.
23. Duties of certain persons entrusted with the examination work:- No
person,
(a) who is appointed as a paper setter at any examination shall supply
or cause to be supplied the question paper drawn by him or a
copy thereof or communicate the contents of such paper to any
person or give publicity thereto in any manner, except in
accordance with the instructions given to him in writing by his
appointing authority in this behalf; or
(b) who is entrusted with the work of printing, cyclostyling, typing
or otherwise producing copies of any question paper set for the
purposes of any examination shall supply or cause to be supplied
a copy thereof or communicate the contents thereof to any person
or give publicity thereto in any manner, except in accordance
with the instructions given to him in writing by the authority
who entrusted the work to him; or
( c) who is entrusted with the custody, or is otherwise in possession
of any question paper set for the purposes of any examination
shall supply or distribute or cause to be supplied or distributed
any copy thereof or communicate the contents thereof to any
person or give publicity thereto in any manner, except in
accordance with the instrucjlons given to him in writing by the
authority who entrusted the custody or give possession thereof
to him.
24. Prohibition of copying/unfair means at Examination, etc:- ( 1) No person
shall in or near an examination hall copy answers to the question papers
set at the examination, from any book, notes or answer papers of other
candidates or commit any other malpractices.
Provided that nothing in this section, shall preclude such person
from taking such assistance from books or materials as is permissible
under the rules governing such examination.
(2) Cases of unfair means /copying shall be dealt as per the CBSE
guidelines or guidelines issued by the State Government from time to
time.
25. Prohibition of impersonating at Examinations:- No person shall appear
or write at any examination for or on behalf of any other candidate.
26. Prohibition ofloitering near Examinations Centre, etc:- No person, save
in the discharge of his duties or orders of his superiors, shall during the

hours when an examination is conducted or any evaluation or tabulation
work relating to any examination is done and one hour preceding the
commencement of such examination, evaluation or tabulation work, loiter
within the premises wherein the examination is held or evaluation or
tabulation work is done or at any public or private place within a distance
of one hundred meters from such premises:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply in respect
of bona fide activities of any such person.
27. Alteration of the answers written at an examination, etc:- No person
shall,
( a) save in accordance with the rules or orders governing the conduct
of an examination,
(i) change, modify, vary or alter the answers written by an
examinee at such examination; or
(ii) introduce additional answer books or sheets into an answer
script or remove or substitute the answer scripts or any
part thereof,
(b) intentionally or knowingly,
(i) make incorrect entries in an answer script or marks register
or marks card; or
(ii) total or re-total wrongly the marks obtained by any
candidate; or
(iii) feed wrong data to the computer, intend-ing thereby the
wrongfully increase or decrease the marks awarded or to be
awarded to the examinee at an examination.
28. Duty of employees of educational institutions to do examination work­
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force
or in any contract or any judgment, decree or order of any Court or T ribunal,
it shall be the duty of every officer, teacher or other employee of every
educational institution and every person in the service or paid or
remunerated by any educational institution to do any work assigned to
him, in connection with any examination.
CHAPTER-V
Registration of Educational Institutions
29. Educational institutions to be registered:- (1) Save as otherwise provided
in this Act, every local authority, institution and every private educational
institution, established on or before the date of commencement of this Act
or intended to be established thereafter, shall notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force, be registered in
accordance with this Act and the rules made thereunder.

(2) No person or local authority shall establish or as the case may be, run
or maintain an educational institution requiring registration under
this section, unless such institution is so registered.
30. Procedure for registration of educational institutions:- (1) Any local
authority or any person or registered body of persons intending to.-
(a) establish an institution imparting education, or
(b) maintain an institution imparting education established on or
before the date of commencement of this Act and in existence on
such date, shall make an application for registration of such
institution to the registering authority within such period and in
such manner along with such fee as may be prescribed.
(2) While registering an institution under sub-section (1), the registering
authority shall have due regard to the following matters, namely. -
( a) that there is need for providing educational facilities to the people
in the locality or for the type of education intended to be provided
by the institution ;
(b) that there is adequate financial provision for continued and
efficient maintenance of the institution as prescribed by the
competent authority ;
( c) that the institution is proposed to be located in sanitary and
healthy surroundings ;
(d) that the site for the building, playground and garden proposed
to be provided and the building in which the institution is
proposed to be housed conform to the rules prescribed therefor;
( e) that the teaching staff qualified according to rules made by the
State Government in this behalf, is or shall be appointed; and
(f) that the applicant satisfies the requirements laid down by this
Act and the rules and orders made thereunder.
(3) The registering authority shall within a period of three months from
the date of receipt of the application :-
(a) register the institution and issue a certificate in the prescribed
form, if the conditions specified or prescribed for registration
have been complied with ; or
(b) specify or extend from time to time, the period for compliance
with such conditions :
Provided that the registering authority, may if it deems
necessary, obtain and consider a report on the need for such

institution from the expert body constituted under section 36
before granting or refusing the registration.
( 4) Where any period is specified or extended under clause (b) of sub­
section (3), the registering authority may register the institution if the
conditions prescribed or specified for registration have been fulfilled
within such period and issue a certificate in the prescribed form but
shall refuse registration where there has been no such compliance.
Every order of refusal shall disclose the grounds for such refusal and
shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the concerned
applicant.
(5) The Governing Council ofan educational institution registered under
this section shall give intimation to the registering authority of any
change in any of the particulars furnished under sub-section ( 1) or of
closure of the institution, in such form. in such manner and shall, on
receipt of such intimation, amend the register and the registration
certificate wherever necessary or, as the case may be, cancel the
certificate.
31. Up-gradation of educational institutions etc:- ( 1) Up-gradation of'the
educational institutions administered by the State Government from
primary to middle, middle to secondary and secondary to higher secondary
shall be made on fulfillment of the following:-
(a) Strength/enrolment of the students in the institution:
(b) Avenues of feeder schools:
(c) Adequate space for the expansion;
( d) Academic performance oflast three consecutive years or;
( e) Any such requirement as may be prescribed.
(2) Any local authority or any person or registered body of persons
intending to:-
(a) open higher classes in an institution registered under this
Act imparting education: or
(b) upgrade any such institution, may make an application to
the registering authority for grant of permission therefor
within such period and in such form accompanied by such
fee as may be prescribed.
(3) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the provisions of sub­
section (2) and (3) of section 30 shall mutatis mutundis, apply to the
granting of permission on such application.
( 4) Where permission is granted under this section the certificate of
registration issued to the institution shall be altered or modified
accordingly.

2. Registration of a recognized educational institution:- (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained 111 section 29, the registering authority shall register a
local authority institution or a private educational institution if such
institution has been recognized by the State Government or the authority
competent to grant such recognition, as the case may be, before the date
of commencement of this Act, in accordance with the rules or orders
applicable to such recognition and the local authority or the Governing
Council, as the case may be. files a statement in the prescribed form before
the registering authority within a period of six months from such date.
(2) No fee shall be payable for the registration of an educational institution
under sub-section ( 1 ).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1 ), where the
registering authority is of opinion that a local authority institution or
a private educational institution docs not conform to the provisions
made by or under this Act, it may direct the local authority concerned
or as the case may be, the Governing Council of the private educational
institution to bring it in conformity with the same within such period
or extended period as it may allow.
33. Cancellation of registration:- (1) Where it appears to the registering
authority that in respect of any private educational insritution or a local
authority institution,-
(a) any condition for registration prescribed or specified under sub­
section (2) of section 30 or the provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder relating to registration are violated; or
(b) the local authority or the Governing Council to which a direction
was given under sub-section (3) of section 32 has contravened
the direction, it may, after holding such enquiry as it deems fit,
send report to the competent authority recommending the
cancellation of registration of such institution.
(2) The competent authority may upon the receipt of the report under
sub-section (I), after giving the local authority or the Governing
Council an opportunity of being heard, order the cancellation of the
certificate or registration of the institution and the removal of its name
from the register. Every such order shall be communicated to the local
authority or the Governing Council and to the registering authority.
34. Registration of Tutorial lnstitutions.- ( 1) ( a) On or after the commencement
of this Act, no tutorial institution shall be started without prior registration
and an application for such registration shall be made to the registering
authority in the prescribed manner along with such fee as may be
prescribed.

(b) In the case of a tutorial institution in existence at the
commencement of this Act. any person or body of persons
managing such institution shall within ninety days from such
commencement make an application for registering to the
registering authority and if no such application is so made or if
the registering authority communicates to him an order refusing
the registration of institution under sub-section (2) of section
30, the person or body of persons managing such institution
shall not run the institution from the date of expiration of ninety
days aforesaid or the date of communication of such order of
refusal as the case may be.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section ( l ), the registering
authority may, after satisfying itself whether or not the application
contains all the prescribed particulars and that the tutorial institution
complies with the minimum requirements prescribed in regard to the
well equipped class room, prescribed number of the students, adequate
infrastructure, sanitary condition of the premises and the qualifications
of the teaching staff, either register the tutorial institution in a separate
register to be maintained for the purpose or refuse the registration,
and shall, where it so registers the institution, issue in the prescribed
form a registration certificate in the name of the tutorial institution.
(3) The person or body of persons managing every tutorial institution
so registered shall submit to the registering authority within two
months after the end of every academic year, an annual report
regarding the coaching facilities provided by it during the
academic year.
( 4) The persons or body of persons managing every tutorial institutions
so registered, shall give intimation to the registering authority or any
change in any of the particulars furnished under sub-section (2), or of
closure of the institution, in such form, in such manner and within
such time as may be prescribed. and the registering authority shall,
on receipt of such intimation, amend register referred to in sub-section
(2) and the registration certificate wherever necessary, or as the case
may be, cancel the certificate and notify the same.
(5) Where the person or body of persons managing any tutorial
institution has, in the opinion of the registering authority, contravened
any of the conditions subject to which the registration certificate is
issued, the registering authority may, after giving the person or body
of persons an opportunity of making a representation, cancel the
registration certificate and remove the name of the institution from
the register referred to in sub-section (2) and notify the same.

CHAPTER-\1
Recognition of Educational Institutions, etc.
35. Recognition :- (1) Recognition may be accorded to any educational
institution registered under this Act in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(2) The granting of recognition shall be subject to fulfillment of the
following conditions. namely:-
(a) security deposit of the prescribed amount shall be made within
the time specified.
(b) the Governing Council shall possess or be assured of adequate
funds to run the institution on a stable footing; and
( c) such other general or special conditions as may be prescribed in
regard to accommodation, appointment of teaching and other
staff, the code of conduct to be accepted and observed by the
Governing Council, furniture and equipment, syllabi, text-books
and such other matters relating thereto.
(3) Any local authority or Governing Council seeking recognition, as the
case may be, for a local authority institution or a private educational
institution shall make an application to the competent authority
furnishing such particulars and in such manner and accompanied by
such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) The competent authority after satisfying itself that the application is
in accordance with the rules, may dispose the application in accordance
with sub-sections ( 6) to (8) of this section, or if deemed necessary
forward the application to the expert body for obtaining its report
under clause (b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 36.
(5) The expert body receiving the application forwarded under sub­
section (4) shall return it to the competent authority along with its
report within such time as may be prescribed.
( 6) The competent authority, after considering the report, if any, received
from the expert body and after holding such inspection or enquiry as
it may deem necessary shall, by order, in writing,-
( a) grant recognition, where the conditions for recognition applicable
to such institutions are fulfilled ; or
(b) grant approval provisionally s,,,,; 1;", il1c fulfillment of the
conditions for recognition wi ti: n a period specified or extended
from time to time by such a,n;,:.,rity:

Provided that the educational institution shall not admit any
fresh batch of students during the period of such provisional
approval.
(7) Ifa period is specified or extended under sub-clause ( h) (,f sub-section
( 6). the competent authority may immediately after the cxpirv of such
period. obtain from the expert body, a report or a further report under
the further report, if any, and holding such inspection or enquiry as
may be deemed necessary shall, by order in writing grunt recognition
where all the conditions for recognition applicable to such institutions
are fulfilled or for reasons robe recorded in wri ting, refuse recognition
where such conditions are not fulfilled:
Provided that recognition shall not be so refused unless the
applicant is given an opportunity of being heard.
( 8) Every order of grant or refusal of recognition passed under this section
shall be communicated to the registering authority and to the applicant.
36. Expert body :- ( 1) The State Govemmcnt shall subject to such rules. as
may be prescribed. constitute such number ofbodies of experts as may be
deemed necessary-
(a) to consider the need for providing educational facilities to the
pupils in the locality or for the type of education:
(b) to consider whether the special conditions. if any for recognition
applicable to any institution have been fulfilled by such
ins ti tu ti on;
(c) to recommend to the State Government from time to time,
modifications or changes in the conditions for recognition: and
(cl) to make recommendations to the State Government or the
competent authority on such other matters as may be referred to
it by the State Government or the competent authority.
(2) The Board of Experts constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall in
accordance with the rules prescribed thereunder submit its report or
further report to the competent authority or the State Government as
the case may be.
7. Recognition of existing institution, etc.- (I) Notwithstanding anything
contained in section 35 :
(a) educational institutions established and run by the State
Government or by any authority sponsored by the Central or
State Government or by a local authority and approved by the

competent authority 111 accordance with such conditions as may
be prescribed shall be deemed to be educational institutions
recognized under this Act:
(b) all educational institutions or any local authority institutions
other than those specified in clause (a) imparting education,
which arc established and recognized in accordance with rules
in force immediately before the commencement of this Act and in
existence at such commencement shall be deemed to be
educational institutions established and recognized under this
Act provided they comply with the provisions of this Act and
the rules made thereunder within such period and in accordance
with such procedure as may be prescribed.
(2) Any private educational institution imparting education which is in
existence at the commencement of this Act but which has not been
recognized in accordance with the rules in force immediately before
such commencement shall discontinue to impart education from such
commencement unless within sixty days of such commencement, an
application for recognition is made. in accordance with the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder and every such application
shall be disposed of within sixty days of its receipt by the competent
authority. No person shall run any such institution after the application
for recognition is rejected.
38. Withdrawal of recognition: - ( l ) Where any local authority or the Governing
Council of any private educational institution.-
( a) fails to fol fill all or any of the conditions of recognition or fails to
comply with the orders of the competent authority in regard to
accommodation, equipments, syllabi, text-books, appointment,
punishment and dismissal of teachers ;
(b) denies admission to any citizen on the ground of religion, race,
caste, language or any of them ;
(c) directly or indirectly encourages in the educational institution
any propaganda or practice wounding the religious feelings of
any class or citizens of India or insulting religion or the religious
belief of that class :
( d) employs or continues to employ any teacher whose certificate
has been cancelled or suspended by the competent authority
after due enquiry or who has been considered by the competent
authority after due enquiry tu be unf t or 1.'ndc~,irable to be a
teacher or arbitrarily terminate : ; of J reacher or fails
to comply with the ,.)<U'cT', or .. he competent authority in this
regard ;

(e) fails to remedy the defects in the instrnction or accommodation
like providing multi- tier system of beds or deficiencies in the
management or discipline within such time as may be specified
therefor by the competent authority ;
(f) rnns educational institution on political affiliation or allegiance
or on communal basis directly or indirectly :
(g) collects unauthorized fee/fund etc. with profit oriented motive:
(h) fails to ensure safety measures in the educational institution
against hazards such as fire, electric combustion, unsanitary
drinking water, tap and separate toilets for boys and girls
including water logging and unsafe location etc.
(i) fails to fulfill the standard norms of area of school building,
strncture and sufficient arrangement of separate entry and exit,
ventilators, two emergency exit doors, fire extinguishers etc.
including ladder entry and exit separately measuring minimum
l .S meters wide where the school is established in multi-storied
building;
U) contravenes any of the provisions of the Act, rules and orders
made thereunder :
(k) the competent authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing.
withdraw the recognition of the institution or take such other
action as is deemed necessary, after giving to the local authority
or as the case may be, the Governing Council an opportunity of
making its representation against such withdrawal or action.
(2) Where the State Government feels it expedient that the recognition
granted to the local authority institution or private educational
institution should in the public interest be withdrawn, may by
notification withdraw the same after giving one month's notice to
such institutions to make any representation.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, no educational institution which has not been
recognized, or the recognition of which has been withdrawn under
this Act shall be entitled, to :-
(a) receive any grant-in-aid from the State funds or other financial
assistance or other facilities from the Government.
(b) send up or present candidates for examinations in courses of
study conducted by a Board or the Goverrunent.

CHAPTER- VII
Management of Government Institutions, Recognized Private Educational
Institutions and Local Authority Institutions, etc.
39. (1) Management Committee of Government Secondary and Higher
Secondary Schools:- Every Secondary and Higher Secondary School
under Department of Education shall constitute the school managing
committee in the following prescribed manner consisting of not more
than eleven members for a term of three years to sit twice in an academic
session. The duties. powers and functions of the committee shall be
as prescribed by the Government from time to time.
(a) Chairperson - Deputy Commissioner/ Additional Deputy
Commissioner/ Sub-Divisional Officer/ Extra Assistant
Commissioner/ Circle Officer of concerned locality where school
exists ;
(b) Member Secretary - Principal/Headmaster of the concerned
school :
(c) Members - Two reputed persons of the society ( one shall be
woman), two parents of the students, two teachers of the
school, school captain and the remaining members to be
nominated or selected as the case may be ;
(2) Management Committee of Government Primary and Middle
Schools :- Every Primary and Middle School under the Department of
Education shall constitute the School Managing Committee or Village
Education Committee consisting of not more than seven members for
a term of three years:-
(a) Chairperson - Preferably elected members of Panchayat or to be
nominated from the host village/town/ward ;
(b) Member Secretary- Headmaster/In-charge Headmaster of the host
school ;
( c) Members - four members from the host village/town/ward
(including one teacher, one woman and one elite person)
(d) Ex-officio Member - one BEO/APO or any representative of
DDSE.
The committee shall meet once in three months. The duties,
powers and functions of the committee shall be as prescribed by
the Government from time to time.
(3) Duties of management oflocal authority institution:- (i) It shall be
the duty of the management of local authority institution to comply
with all the provisions of this Act and the rules or orders made
thereunder.
(ii) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
provision, it shall be the duty of the Management ofa local
authority institution.-

( a) to ensure that all mom es collected bv or granted or allotted to the
local authority by or under this Act. arc expended for educational
purposes: and
(b) to submit e\cry year before such date and io such authority. as
may be prescribed. an annual report relating to the administration
of the local authority institution and an annual budget
estimate relating thereto.
40. Management of recognized educational institutions :- ( l) :\O recognized
private educational institutions shall be managed except in conformity
with the rules which the State Government may frame for such institutions.
(2) The rules under sub-section ( 1) may. inter alia. include:-
(i) qualification for posts of teaching and non-teaching
employees:
(ii) the manner of recruitment of the teaching and non-teaching
employees:
(iii) scale's of pay & allowances as admissible:
(iv) leave. pension. provident fund, insurance and such other
benefits:
(v) maintenance and enforcement of discipline of employees:
(vi) powers. functions and responsibilities of the management:
( vii) duties and responsibilities of the Secretary : and
(viii) maintenance and submission of records. accounts and other
returns to the prescribed authority.
(3) While recruiting the teaching and non-teaching employees, every
recognized educational institution shall comply with the orders issued
by the State Government from time to time for reservation of posts for
Scheduled Castes. Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes of
citizens and the weaker sections of people.
(4) The Governing Council shall have the power to appoint the head of
the institution and also 10 take disciplinary action against him
according to the prescribed rule.
(5) If there is a change in the Govern mg Council of the institution or
change in the location of the institution a fresh application for
recognition shall be made as if it were a newly started institution.
41. Managing Committee: - ( 1) Every recognized private educational institution
shall have a Managing Committee by whatever name called.
(2} The Managing Committee shall be' reconstituted once in three years.

(3) The Managing Committee shall consist of not less than nine members
nominated by the Govern mg Council, of whom not Jess than three
including the academic head of the institution and two members of
the teaching staff shall be representatives of teachers of the institution
and at least two other shall be representatives of parents selected in
accordance with the prescribed rules :
Provided that
(a) such members of the staff shall be nominated by rotation
according to seniority for a period of three years each; and
(b) where the institution has Jess than three members of the teaching
staff all of them shall be representatives of the teachers:
Provided further that not more than two persons who are
close relations shall be nominated as members of the Managing
Committee. For the purpose of this proviso close relations means.
spouses, parents. children. brothers, sisters, brothers-in-law,
sisters-in-law, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, father's brothers and
sisters, mother 's, brothers and sisters. brothers or sisters sons
or daughters.
Explanation: - The number mentioned in this sub-section shall be in
addition to the representati vex. i C any. or the State Government or as
required by or under any law fo r the time being in force.
( 4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) to (3) the
Board of trustees or governing body or wakf board, by whatever
name called, constituted or appointed under any other law for the
time being in force relating to charitable and other similar institutions
and endowments and wakf shall be deemed to be a Managing
Committee constituted under this sub-section.
42. President and Secretary> (1) There shall be a President and Secretary for
every Managing Committee appointed from among its members:
Provided that no employee of the private educational institution
other than its academic head shall be chosen as the Secretary :
Provided further that every person who. on the date of commencement
of this Act, is exercising the powers of the Secretary shall be deemed to be
the Secretary of the institution.
(2) The Secretary shall, subject to the general superintendence and control
of the Managing Committee, be the Chief Executive of the institution
in all matters pertaining to the private educational institution and all
acts done by the Secretary in connection with the affairs of the
educational institution shall be binding on the Governing Council.

Provided that the Governing Council may within a period of
thirty days from the date of the aforesaid acts of the Secretary. modify
or cancel such act.
(3) The Secretary shall be the custodian of all its property and records
and shall be responsible for their proper custody, maintenance and
safety. He shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be prescribed.
43. Removal of the Secretary: - Notwithstanding anything contained in section
42, if at any time the competent authority is satisfied that the Secretary is
not managing the private educational institution in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the rules it may direct the Governing Council to
replace the Secretary by another person. The Governing Council shall be
bound to comply with the said direction.
44. Meetings, etc. :-(1) The Managing Committee shall hold such number of
meetings at such place and observe such rules of procedure in regard to
the institutional matters at its meetings (including the quorum at the
meetings) as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Managing Committee shall meet at least once in six
months.
(2) The President or in his absence, any member chosen by the members
present shall preside at a meeting.
(3) All questions at the meeting shall be decided by a majority of votes
of the members present and voting and in the case of equality of
votes; the person presiding shalJ have the right to exercise a second
or casting vote.
45. Powers and functions of the Managing Committee.- (I) Subject to the
provisions of this Act and the rules prescribed thereunder, the Managing
Committee shall have the following powers and functions. namely.-
Ca) to carry on the general administration of the private educational
institution ;
(b) to appoint teachers and other employees of the private educational
institutions except the head :
( c) to take disciplinary action against the teachers and other employees
except the head of the institution ;
( d) to supervise and control the employees of the institution: and
( e) to look into the welfare of the teachers and other employees :
(f) to help the academic head to maintain tone and discipline of the
institution :
(g) to review the budget and other financial matter of the institution;
(h) any other matters which may be prescribed.

(2) Any decision or action taken by the Managing Committee shall be
communicated by the Secretary to the Governing Council within thirty
days there from. Any decision or action taken and so communicated
shall be deemed to be the decision or action taken by the Governing
Council unless the Governing Council within a period of twenty-one
days from the date of receipt of the communication rescinds or modifies
it.
CHAPTE R- VIII
Admission in Recognized Educational Institutions,
Scales of Fees, etc.
46. Admission, etc., to be according to rules: - Admission in the
Government schools shall be made without any distinction of religion,
race, caste, creed, place of birth or any of them. Admission of students
to a recognized educational institution including the maximum number
of students to be admitted thereto, their transfers, migrations and
removal shall be in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.
47. Fees :-
( 1) There shall be common fee structure in all Government schools of the
State at the prescribed stage.
(2) Fee charges should be commensurate with the facilities provided by
the institution under the heads prescribed by the Directorate of School
Education.
(3) No fee in the name of capitation or voluntary donation or lottery or
any other such form should be collected in the name of school.
( 4) The fee should not be revised during the midsession.
(5) Subject to any other law for the time being in force, no Governing
Council of a recognized educational institution shall levy or collect
any fees or charges or donations or other payments, by whatever
name called, save such and at such rate and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
( 6) The amounts levied or collected under sub-section ( 5) shall be utilized
judiciously for the school development by the educational institution
in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER-IX
Grants-in-aid
48. Government to set apart sum for giving grant-in-aid to certain recognized
institution :- (1) The State Government shall within the limits of its

economic capacity or as per availability offund. set apart a sum of money
annually for being given as grant-in-aid (thcreinaficr in this Act referred to
as grant) to local authority institutions and private institutions in the
State recognized for this purpose in accordance with rules made in this
behalf.
(2) The rules made under sub-section ( l ) may also require the institution
receiving the grant to comply with any provision for the reservation
of appointments or posts in favour of Scheduled Castes. Scheduled
Tribes. any backward class and other rcserv eel categories subject to
such modification. if any. which the State Government may make in
the application of such provision to any class or classes of such
ins ti tu iions.
49. Authorities which may sanction grant:- ( l) The State Government may in
such cases as they think fit, by order, sanction grant to any recognized
local authority educational institution or private educational institution
subject to such conditions as they may impose in the order relating to
such grant.
( 2) Every grant sanctioned under sub-section (1) shall be disbursed by
the Commissioner (Education) or the Director of School Education or
such other officer subordinate to the Commissioner or the Director as
the State Government may, by general or special order. authorize in
this behalf in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Governing Council of every recognized institution which is
receiving any grant out of the Central or State funds shall be
responsible for the fulfillment of all the conditions subject to which
such grant has been given.
50. Monies received from sources other than grant: - ( 1) Subject to any
law for the time being in force any money received by way of voluntary
donation from donors may be accepted by the institution or the Governing
Council and the fact shall be intimated mandatorily either by the head of
the institution or the Governing Council within sixty days from the elate of
such acceptance to the competent authority. Such money shall be
deposited in the account of the institution in such Nationalized or
Scheduled Bank as may be approved by the State Government and shall
be applied and expended for the improvement of the institution and the
development of educational facilities and for such other purposes as may
be prescribed.
(2) Subject to any lavv for the time being in force, no money shall be
collected before, during or after admission of any person by any educational
institution as a condition precedent to such admission except towards the
prescribed fees.

51. Application for sanction of grant and the conditions to be fulfilled on such
sanction:- ( 1) Every application for the sanction of grant shall be made to
the State Government in such form as may be prescribed and shall contain
a declaration signed by the Governing Council of the recognized institution
to the effect that the conditions of recognition and of grant are being and
shall continue to be fully observed, that all facilities for inspection of that
institution, its accounts. registers and other records relating to the grant
shall be afforded to the inspecting staff deputed for the purpose and that
all the retums and reports prescribed in this behalf shall be submitted to
the competent authority within the time specified by it.
(2) The State Government may sanction such grant or for good and
sufficient reasons refuse to sanction such grant.
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act. any order passed by the
State Government refusing to sanction the grant shall be final and
shall not be questioned in any court of law.
52. Powers of State Government to withhold reduce or withdraw grant:­
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the State
Government may, after such enquiry as they may deem fit withhold, reduce
or withdraw any grant payable during the year to an educational institution
having regard to the funds at the disposal of the State Government or the
conduct and efficiency and the financial condition of such institution,
after giving an opportunity to the Governing Council of the institution
concerned of making a representation against such withholding, reduction
or withdrawal.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section
( 1) or any other provisions of this Act, the State Government may,
after such enquiry as they may deem fit withhold. reduce or withdraw
any grant payable to any educational institution if the Governing
Council of the institution concerned :-
(i) fails to fulfill all or any of the conditions of grant:
(ii) denies admission to any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, language or any of them.
(iii) allows any employee of the institution to take part in any
agitation intended to bring or attempt to bring into hatred
or contempt or intended to excite or attempt to excite
disaffection towards the Government established by law in
India;
(iv) directly or indirectly, encourages any propaganda or practice .
or wounding the religious feelings of any class of citizens
oflndia or insulting the religious beliefs of that class :

(v) is guilty of falsification of registers or misuse of funds for the
purposes other than those for which they are collected :
(vi) fails to remedy within such reasonable time as specified by
the competent authority the defects in the maintenance of
accounts pointed out by the auditors : or
(vii) fails to restore, within the time specified by the competent
authority, an employee whose services have been wrongfully
dispensed with or fails to pay him any arrears of salary or
other benefits when directed to do so by the competent
authority.
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every order passed under
this section shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court of
law.
53. Utilization of funds and movable property of private institutions:- (1) All
the monies received or held by or on behalf of every private institution
shall be utilized for the purposes for which they are intended, and shall be
accounted for by the Governing Council in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) All the monies received or held by or on behalf of every private
institution shall be deposited in a Scheduled Bank.
(3) The surplus fund of every such institution shall be invested in such
manner as may be prescribed and shall be utilized towards educational
development only.
CHAPTER-X
Accounts,Audit, Inspection and Returns
54. Accounts : - Every educational institution receiving grants out of State
funds and other sources shall maintain accounts in such manner and
-containing such particulars as may be prescribed.
55. Annual audit of accounts : - ( 1) The accounts of every educational
institution receiving grants out of State funds shall be audited at the end
of every academic year in such manner, after following such procedure
and by such authority, officer or person as may be prescribed and different
authorities, officers or persons may be prescribed for different categories
of educational institutions.
(2) The prescribed authority, officer or person shall have full access to
the account books and other documents required to be maintained by
the educational institution in respect of grants received by it out of
State funds and shall send a copy of the report on the audit of the
accounts under sub-section ( 1) to the competent authority who shall
forward the report to the State Government.

56. Inspection or inquiry, etc.:- ( l) The State Government or the competent
authority may suo motu or otherwise cause an inspection of or inquiry in
respect of any educational institution its accounts, its buildings,
laboratories, libraries. workshops, equipments and also of the examinations,
teaching and other work conducted or done by the institution to be made
by such person or persons as it may direct or to cause an inquiry to be
held in respect of examination, working and financial condition of such
institution or of any other matter connected with the institution in
accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.
(2) The Governing Council and the employees of the educational institution
shall at all reasonable times be bound to afford to the aforesaid officer
all such assistance and facilities as may be required for the purpose of
such inspection or inquiry.
(3) The officer empowered under sub-section ( 1) shall have the following
powers, namely:-
(a) he shall. at all reasonable times have access to the books,
accounts, documents, securities. cash and other properties
belonging to or in the custody of the Governing Council and
may summon any person in possession or responsible for the
custody of such books, accounts, documents, securities, cash
or other properties to produce the same at any place as he may
direct.
(b) he may summon any person who, he has reason to believe has
any knowledge as to the affairs of the educational institution to
appear before him and may examine such person on oath.
(4) the person or officer assigned for inspection or inquiry shall on
completion of inspection or inquiry. submit the detail report for
appropriate decision/action to the competent authority for onward
submission to the State Government within the period as may be
prescribed.
57. Furnishing of returns etc: - Every educational institution shall within
such time or within such extended time as may be fixed by the competent
authority in this behalf, furnish to the competent authority such returns,
statistics and other information as the competent authority may, from time
to time. require.
CHAP.fER-Xl
Prohibition of Transfer of Properties by Aided
Educational Institutions
58. Prohibition of transfer of lands and buildings by educational institutions
without the permission from Government in certain cases: - ( 1) Where
before or after the cornrncncem:::nt of this Act:-

(a) any land or building has been acquired, constructed, improved
or altered for the purposes of any educational institution, with
the aid of any grant made from the State funds:
(b) any land or building has been transferred by the Government for
use for the purposes of any educational institution, then
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other law for
the time being in force or in any deed of transfer or other document
relating to the land or building, it shall not be transferred without
the permission of the State Government under sub-section (2)
nor shall the land or building be used for any purpose other than
the purposes of the educational institution or purposes ancillary
thereto without the permission of the State Government.
(2) The State Government may, by order in writing permit the transfer of
any such land or building, subject to such conditions as it may impose,
if:-
(a) the transfer is made in furtherance of the purposes of the
educational institution or of ancillary purposes approved by the
State Government and the proceeds of such transfer are to be
wholly utilized in furtherance of the said purposes ;
(b) the transfer is made only in part in furtherance of the purposes
aforesaid, provided repayment is made to the State Government
of such portion as the State Government may direct in the
circumstances of the case, of the grant referred to in clause (a) of
sub-section (1) or of the current market value of the land or
building referred to in clause (b) of sub-section ( 1) or of both, as
the case may be ;
( c) the transfer is made for any other valid reason provided repayment
is made to the State Government in full of the grant referred to in
clause (a) of sub-section ( 1) or of the current market value of the
land or building referred to in clause (b) of sub-section ( 1) or of
both, as the case may be.
(3) Any transfer of land or building made without obtaining the
permission of the Government under sub-section (2), shall be null and
void.
59. Consequence of breach of provisions of section 58:- Where, in any case,
the State Government, after giving the Governing Council of the
Educational institution concerned an opportunity to make its
representation in regard to the matter, is satisfied that the provisions of
sub-section (1) of section 58 have been contravened in respect of any
land or building it may, by order:-

(a) if the land or the land together with the building standing thereon
belonged to the State Government and was transferred by it for
the purposes of the educational institution, direct the Deputy
Commissioner to take possession of the land or land together
with the building standing thereon as the case may be, or at their
option, direct the Governing Council to pay to it in full, the current
market value of the land or of the land together with that of the
building where it was also transferred by it and also the amount
of the grant, if any, made by the State Government for improving
the land or altering or constructing_ the building ; and
(b) if the land or the building, if any, standing thereon does not
belong to the State Govenunent, direct the Governing Council to
repay in full the grant made by the State Government with interest
from the date of contravention, at such rate as may be notified
by the State Government,
60. Effect of orders under sub-section (2) of section 58 and 59 :- ( 1) Every
order passed by the State Government under sub-section (2) of section 58
or section 59 shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of
this section, be final.
(2) The Governing Council of the institution not being a local authority,
in respect of which such an order is passed, may on the ground that
the amount repayable by or to it has been wrongly fixed in the order,
apply within sixty days from the date on which the order is received
by it to the District Judge having jurisdiction over the area in which
the property in question is situated for fixing such amount correctly
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 58 or
(3) The District judge shall determine the amount which is properly
repayable or payable by or to the Governing Council in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 58 or section 59, as
the case may be and such determination shall be final.
61. Land or building to vest in Government absolutely on possession being
taken:- (1) When, in pursuance of an order under section 59, the Deputy
Commissioner takes possession of any land or building by himself or
through another, it shall vest absolutely in the State Government free from
all encumbrances.
(2) If the Deputy Commissioner or any person authorized by him in this
behalf is opposed or impeded in taking possession of any land or
building under this chapter, he shall, if he is a Magistrate, enforce the

surrender of such land or building to himself and if he is not a
Magistrate, he shall apply to a Magistrate and such Magistrate shall
enforce the surrender of the land or building to the Deputy
Commissioner.
(3) Whoever opposes or impedes the Deputy Commissioner or any person
authorized by him in taking possession of any land or building under
this chapter shall be punished with imprisomnent which may extend
to six months or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees
or with both.
62. Recovery of sums due under this chapter : - Any sum required to be repaid
or paid to the State Government in pursuance of section 58 or section 59 or
any other law for the time being in force, be recovered from the properties
of the institution or from the Governing Council thereof as ifit were an
arrear ofland revenue due from such educational institution or Governing
Council.
63. Court not to attach, sell etc., in the absence of permission of the State
Government: - ( 1) No land or building referred to in sub-section ( 1) of
by any court whether in execution of a decree or order or otherwise. unless
the person seeking such relief from the court has obtained the permission
of the State Government to do so and files such permission in the court.
(2) When granting such permission, the State Government may impose
such conditions as it deems fit.
(3) If any such land or building is attached or sold, or a charge is created
thereon by any court without obtaining and filing the permission of
the State Government as aforesaid or if any condition imposed by it
when granting such permission is contravened, then the attachment.
sale or charge, as the case may be. shall be null and void.
CIUPTER-Xll
Taking over of Management, Requisitioning and Acquisition
of Educational Institutions
64. Taking over of management of educational institutions in public
interest :- (1) When the State Government is of the opinion that the
management of any educational institution should either in the public
interest or in order to secure the proper management of the said educational
institution be taken over, it may, after giving one month's notice to the
person or body of persons in-charge of the management of such

educational institution to make any representation, direct by notification,
that the management of the educational institution shall with effect on
and from the date specified therein vest in the State Government.
(2) The educational institution referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
deemed to include all assets. rights, and lease holds, powers,
authorities and privileges and all property- movable and immovable
including lands, building. stores, instruments and vehicles, cash
balance. revenue fund, investments and book debts and all other
rights and interests arising out of such property as were immediately
before the date of taking over of the management under sub-section
( 1) (hereinafter in this chapter referred to as the date aforesaid) in the
ownership. possession, power or control of the management of such
educational institution and all books of accounts, registers and all
other documents of whatever nature relating thereto.
( 3) Any contract. whether express or implied, or other arrangement (not
being a contract) or agreement specified in section 59 in so far as it
relates to the management of the educational institution, and in force
immediately before the taking over, shall be deemed to have terminated
on the date aforesaid.
( 4) All persons, in whom the management of the educational institution
vested immediately before the taking over shall, as from the date
aforesaid. cease to be so vested and shall be deemed to have vacated
their offices as such on the date aforesaid.
(5) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force,
no person in respect of whom any contract of management or other
arrangement is terminated by reason of the provisions contained in
sub-section (3) or who ceases to bold any office by reason of the
provisions contained in sub-section ( 4) shall be entitled to claim any
compensation for the premature termination of the contract of
management or other arrangement of for the cessation of management
or for the loss of office, as the case may be.
( 6) Notwithstanding any judgment. decree or order of any court, tribunal
or other authority or anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force. every person in whose possession or custody or under
whose control the educational institution or any part thereof, or any
properties attached thereto vest shall transfer the same to the special
officer appointed hy the State Government r.ir the purpose of carrying
on the management of such education .!.l nsu.uuon for and on behalf
of the State Government, or where n.. 0µi:c;al officer is appointed, to
such other person as rhe State Government may direct.

(7) For the removal of any doubt a declaration as may be prescribed
shall be made that any liability incurred by the private management in
relation to the educational institution before the taking over shall be
enforceable against the said Governing Council and not against the
State Government or the Special Officer.
(8) The amount payable in respect of the vesting in the State Government
or the Governing Council of an educational institution under sub­
section ( 1) shall be at such rate as may be prescribed.
(9) The amount payable under sub-section (8) shall, subject to rules
made under this Act, be paid by the competent authority to the person
interested in the educational institution in such manner and within
such time as may be prescribed.
65. Relinquishment of management of educational institutions:- (l) After
the expiry of the period specified in sub-section ( l) of section 64, the
management of educational institution shall vest in accordance with the
order, if any, of any Court, and if there be no such order, vest in the
Governing Council or managing committee (by whatever name called) of
such educational institution or such other body or person, as the case
may be entitled thereto.
(2) If at any time before the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section
(1) of section 64, it appears to the State Government that the purpose
of vesting of the management of educational institution in the State
Government has been fulfilled or that for any other reason it is not
necessary that the management of such educational institution should
remain vested in the State Government, it may, by order published in
the Official Gazette, relinquish the management of such educational
institution with effect from such date as may be specified in the order.
(3) On and from the date specified under sub-section ( 1) the management
of the educational institution shall be transferred in accordance with
the order, of any Court, and if there be no such order, shall be transferred
to the Governing Council or the managing committee (by whatever
name called) of the educational institution or such other body or
person, as the case may be, entitled thereto.
66. Power to terminate contract of employment: - If the State Government or
the Special Officer appointed under section 64 is of the opinion that any
contract of employment entered into by the Governing Council in relation
to the educational institution at any time before taking over is unduly
e:1'oneous, it or he may, by giving to the employee one month's notice in
writing or salary or wages for one month in lieu thereof, terminate such
contract employment.

67. Contracts, etc., made in bad faith may be cancelled or varied i- (1) If the
State Government is satisfied. after such enquiry as it may think proper,
that any contract or agreement entered into at any time within a period of
two years immediately preceding the date aforesaid between the Governing
Council in relation to the educational institution and any other person, in
relation to any service, sale or supply to. or by the educational institution
and in force immediately before the taking over has been entered into in
bad faith or is found detrimental to the interest of the educational
institution, it may make, within one hundred and eighty days from the date
aforesaid an order canceling or varying ( either unconditional or subject to
such conditions as it may think fit to impose) such contract or agreement
and thereafter the contract or agreement shall have effect accordingly :
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varied
except giving to the parties to the contract or agreement one month's
notice to make a representation in this regard.
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order and under sub-section (1) may,
within thirty days from the date of communication of the order, make
an application to the district court of original jurisdiction within the
local limits of whose jurisdiction the educational institution is situated
for the variation or reversal of such order and thereupon such court
may confirm, modify or reverse such order.
68. Requisitioning ofan educational institution :-(1) Where recognition or
permission granted to an educational institution is withdrawn by the State
Government under sub-section (2) of section 38 or otherwise, or where an
educational institution is closed before the last working day of an academic
year and if the State Government consider it necessary to requisition any
property- movable or immovable, which before the withdrawal of the
recognition or permission or the closing of the institution or of any other
institution connected therewith, such as hostel for students, quarters for
the residence of employees or playground, then notwithstanding anything
to the contrary in any other law for the time being in force, the State
Government may, within three months from the withdrawal of the
recognition or permission or the closing of the educational institution, as
the case may be, requisition such property and make such further orders
as appears to it to be necessary or expedient in connection with the
requisition.
(2) Before requisitioning any property under sub-section (1), the State
Government:-
(a) shall call upon the Governing Council or any other person who is
in possession of the property by notice in writing show cause,

within thirty days of the date of the service of such notice to him
why the property should not be requisitioned and shall consider
the objections, if any. shown by the Governing Council : and
(b) may, by order. direct that rhe Govcrmng Council or any person
shall not. without permission of competent authorirv. dispose
of structurally alter. lease or many manner deal with. the property
until the expiry of such period. not exceeding three months. as
may be specified in the order.
(3) Where any property is requisitioned under sub-section ( 1) the
Government may i-
(a) use or deal with such property for any educational purpose: or
(b) by order, permit any person or body or local authority to use or
deal with such property for any such purpose. subject to the
payment of such rent and other sums to the Government and the
observance of such conditions as may be specified in the order.
69. Summary power for taking possession of property :- (I) Any p crso n
remaining in possession of any property in contravention of an order
issued under section 68 may be summarily dispossessed of such property
by an officer empowered by the State Government in this behalf and in the
case ofa building if free access to it is not afforded to such officer. he may
after giving reasonable time may. remove or open any lock or bolt or break
open any door or do any other act necessary for efTectmg such dispos­
session.
(2) If any such officer is resisted in the exercise of such pcm er or discharge
of such duty, the Magistrate having jurisdiction shall. on a written
requisition from such officer, direct any police officer not below the
rank of Sub-Inspector to render such help 3S may be necessary to
enable the officer to exercise such power or discharg« such duty.
70. Release from requisitioning discharge of liability of the State
Government :- ( l) The State Government may. at any time. release any
property requisitioned under this chapter and in such a case the possession
of the property released from requisition shall be delivered to the Governing
Council or any person from whose possession the property requisitioned
was taken or if there were no such Governing Council or person. the
person deemed by the State Government to be entitled to the possession
of such property, and such delivery or possession shall be full discharge
of the State Government from all liabilities in respect of that property
which any other person may be entitled. by the due process of law, to
enforce against the person to whom possession of the property is so
delivered.

(2) Where the person to whom possession of any such property is to be
delivered cannot be found or has no agent or other person empowered
to accept delivery on his behalf the State Government shall cause to
be published in the Official Gazette a notice declaring that the property
is released from requisition. and in the case of any immovable property,
the State Government shall also cause a copy thereof to be affixed, on
some conspicuous part of such property.
(3) \Vhen the notice referred to in sub-section (2) is published in the
Official Gazette. the property specified in such notice shall cease to
be subject to requisition on and from the date of such publication and
shall be deemed to have been delivered to the person entitled to
possession thereof, and the State Government shall not be liable for
any amount, rent or other claim in respect of such property for any
period after the said date.
71. Acquisition of property:- ( 1) Where any property is vested under sub­
section ( 1) of section 65 in connection with the management of an
educational institution or is subject to requisition under sub-section (I) of
the property for any public purpose connected with education. acquire at
any time (but before the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section (I)
of section 65 such property for the said public purpose by publishing in
the Official Gazette a notice to the effect that the State Government has
decided to acquire the property in pursuance of this section.
Provided that before issuing suchnotice. the State Government shall
call upon the Governing Council or any other person who in the opinion
of the State Government is the person interested in such property to show
cause why the property should not be acquired: and after considering the
objections, if any, shown by the Governing Council or other person
interested in the property the State Government may pass such orders as
it deem fit.
(2) When notice as aforesaid is published in the Official Gazette, the
requisitioned property shall from the day on which the notice is so
published, cease to be subject to-requisition and vest absolutely in
the State Government free from all encumbrances.
Principles and methods of determining amount for property requisitioned
or acquired:- ( 1) Where any property is requisitioned or acquired under
this Act, the amount payable therefor shall be as determined and paid in
the manner and in accordance with principles hereinafter set out, that is to
say '-
(a) where the amount is settled and fixed by agreement it shall
be paid accordingly :

(b) where there is no such agreement. the State Government
shall appoint an arbitrator, a person who is holding or has
held a judicial office, not below the rank ofa District Judge,
for determining the amount :
( c) at the commencement of the proceedings before the arbitrator
the State Government and the person to whom the amount is
payable shall state what according to them is the fair amount:
( d) The arbitrator shall after the enquiry determine the amount
which appears to him to be just and specify the person or
persons to whom such amount shall be paid and in making
the award determining the amount, he sha11 have regard to
the circumstances of each case and the provisions of sub­
sections (2), (3). (4) and (5) so far as they are applicable:
( c) Where there is any dispute as the person or persons who
arc entitled to the amount. the arbitrator shall decide such
dispute and if the arbitrator finds that more persons than
one are entitled to the amount, he shall apportion the amount
amongst such persons according to their rights; and
( f) The provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
(Central Act No.26 of 1996) shall apply not covered under
this Act.
(2) The amount payable for the requisitioning of any property, movable
or immovable, shall in respect of the period of requisition, be a sum
equal to the rent which would have been payable for the use and
occupation of the immovable property or for the use of the movable
property if it had been taken on lease for that period.
(3) The amount payable for the acquisition of any immovable property
under section 72 shall be, the price which the requisitioned property
would have fetched in the open market if it had remained in the same
condition as it was at the time of requisitioning and been sold on the
date of acquisition ;
(4) The amount payable for the acquisition of any movable property
shall be the price which such property would have fetched in the
open market if it had been sold on the date of acquisition.
(5) Where any property requisitioned or acquired under this Act was
acquired with the grant from the State funds, the amount of such
grant shall be taken into account in the prescribed manner in
determining the amount payable.

5,.,,., .J.J
Explanation :- For purposes of this sub-section, all the property
acquired by the educational institution shall be deemed to have been
acquired with the aid of such grant, contribution, donation or collection
unless the Governing Council of the educational institution proves to
the satisfaction of the arbitrator that the property has been acquired
otherwise.
73. Payment of amount for property requisitioned or acquired:- The amount
payable under the award of arbitrator shall, subject to any rules made
under this Act, be paid by the competent authority to the person interested,
in such manner and within such time as may be specified in the award.
74. Appeal from the award of the arbitrator under section 72 in respect of
amount:-Any person aggrieved by the award of the arbitrator under section
may, within sixty days from the date of such award, prefer an appeal to
the High Court :
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry
of the said period of sixty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
75. Arbitrator to have certain powers of civil court:- The arbitrator appointed
under this chapter, while holding arbitration proceedings under this Act,
shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, (Central Act 5 of 1908) in respect of the following
matters, namely : -
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document ;
( c) reception of evidence or affidavits ;
( d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office ;
( e) summoning to witnesses for examination.
76. Powers of entry and inspection and calling for information: - The
competent authority may, for the purpose of requisitioning or acquiring
any property under this chapter, by order:-
(a) empower any authority to enter and inspect any property specified
in the order liable to be requisitioned or acquired under this Act;
(b) require any person to furnish to such authority such information
in his possession relating to the property as may be specified in
the order.
77. Provisions for existing staff of educational institutions:- On and from the
date of management of educational institution is vested in the State
Government the existing staff of such educational institution shall be
governed by such rules as may be prescribed by the State Government.

33-+
CHAPTER-XIII
Provision for Ancillary services in recognized Educational Institutions
78. Medical Examinations and Health Services :-( l) The State Government
may prescribe rules as to the conduct of medical examinations and medical
inspections of students in recognized educational institutions. and such
rules. in particular make provision requiring that any class of such
exammations or inspections shall be conducted by duly qualified medical
practitioners having such special qualifications or experience as may be
prescribed. or shall be conducted by a duly qualified medical practitioner
selected by any educational authority.
(2) The State Government shall endeavour to establish an educational
health service for the purpose of rendering medical or health assistance
to students attending the recognized educational institutions.
79. Provision of meals and refreshments:- The State Government shall
endeavour to provide mid-day meals and other refreshments as may be
deemed 1K·eessar:,' for pupils in .utcudancc at rccugnizeLl educational
institutions. The State Government may make provisions by rules as to
the manner in which and the persons by whom the expense of providing
such meals or refreshments is to be defrayed, as to the facilities to be
afforded and the sen ices to be rendered by the Governing Council with
respect to the provisions of such meals or refreshments and as to such
other consequential matters.
80. Provision of facilities for recreation and physical training:- (I) It
shall be the duty of every recognized educational institution to ensure
that the facilities for education provided therein include adequate facilities
for recreation and physical training.
(2) The State Government may establish. maintain and manage or assist
the establishment. maintenance and management of camps, vocation
classes. playing fields. play and physical education centres and other
places at which facilities for recreation. sports and training as specified
in sub-section (I) arc available for persons receiving education in
recognized educational institutions.
I. Guidance services.- The State Government shall endeavour to make
adequate provisions for imparting educational. vocational. personal
guidance and counseling services to students studying in recognized
educational institutions.
82. Library servicer- The State Government shall endeavour to make provisions
for the establishment of school libraries 111 recognized educational
institutions and provide the necessary facilities for the proper use of such
libraries by the students studying in such institutions.

83. Other miscellaneous services: - The State Government shall endeavour
to make provisions for regulating other miscellaneous services such as
literary and academic activities, social service activities. cultural activities,
labour week activities including NCC, NSS and Scouts and Guides Parade,
programme and training etc. to the students studying in the recognized
educational institution.
CHAPTER-XIV
Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees in
Private Educational Institutions
84. Qualifications and conditions of service of employees : - The State
Government may make rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of
service (including rights as regards disciplinary matters) of the employees
in recognized private educational institutions :
Provided that the minimum qualifications for recruitment age of
recruitment and retirement and benefits of retirement for employees in
educational institutions receiving maintenance grant from the State
Government shall be the same as those applicable for the corresponding
category of c mp lo yec s , if any, in State Institutions unless o t he rwi se
prescribed.
85. Appointment of employees No person who does not possess the
requisite qualifications prescribed under section 84 shall, on and from the
elate of commencement of this Act, be appointed, as an employee in a
recognized private educational institutions.
86. Pay and allowances of Teachers and other employees:- The pay and
allowances of persons employed in the recognized private institutions
shall be paid on or before such day in every month, in such manner and by
or through such officer or authority as may be prescribed.
87. Schedule of employment to be maintained :- (1) Every private educa­
tional institution shall maintain :: ' ,'hedule of employees indicating therein
the number of persons in its employment, the name and qualification of
each employee, the grade of pay and such other particulars as may be
prescribed.
(2) Within three months from the date of commencement of this Act and
within a like period after any alteration in such schedule is made, a
private educational institution shall submit a copy of the Schedule or
alteration made therein, as the case may be, to the Director of School
Education or such other officer as may be notified for this purpose.

(3) The Schedule of appointments for the time being in force shall be
kept at the office of the private educational institution and shall during
office hours, be open free of charge, for inspection by any employee
of that private educational institution or any other authorized officer.
The names and qualifications of the teaching staff shall be displayed
in a prominent place in the institution.
88. Code of conduct:- (1) Every employee of a private educational institution
shall be governed by the prescribed code of conduct and if he violates
any provision thereof he shall be liable for the prescribed disciplinary
action.
(2) The Managing Committee may with prior approval of the State
Government or any authority authorized or prescribed in this behalf
by the State Government also prescribe standards of conduct to be
observed by employees, provided they are not inconsistent with those
prescribed under sub-section (1).
89. Dismissal, removal, etc:- ( 1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this
behalf no teacher or other employee of a private educational institution
shall be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank except :
(a) in accordance with the conditions of service governing him;
(b) after an inquiry, in which he has been informed of the charges
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard
in respect of the said charges, and where it is proposed after
such inquiry to impose on him such penalty, it may impose such
penalty, on the basis of the evidence adduced during such
mquiry :
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to temporary
employees or to the dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of a
teacher or other employees on the ground of misconduct which
has led to his conviction on a criminal charge involving moral
turpitude.
(2) No order imposing any penalty other than those referred to in sub­
section ( 1) shall be passed except after :
(a) the teacher or employee is informed in writing of the proposal to
take action against him and of the allegation on which it is
proposed to be taken and given an opportunity to make any
representation which he may wish to make ; and
(b) such representation, if any, is taken into consideration.

(3) (a) A teacher or other employee may be placed under suspension by
the managing committee:-
(i) where disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated
or is pending : or
(ii) where a case against him in respect of any criminal offence
is under investigation or trial ;
(b) No such suspension shall remain in force for more than six
months:
Provided that if the enquiry is not completed within the
period of six months, the Secretary shall report the matter to the
competent authority, who may permit extension of the period of
suspension beyond six months, ifhe is satisfied that the enquiry
could not be so completed due to circumstances beyond the
control of the Governing Council;
( c) The Managing Committee placing an employee under suspension
shall forthwith report to the competent authority the
circumstances in which the order was made ;
(d) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, every employee
placed under suspension under this section shall be entitled to
such subsistence allowance as may be prescribed.
90. Communication ofordcr : (1) Every order of the Managing Committee
imposing any penalty or otherwise affecting the conditions of service of
an employee to his prejudice shall be communicated to the employee in
the prescribed manner.
(2) No order which has not been communicated in accordance with sub­
section ( 1) shall be valid or be of any effect whatsoever.
91. Appeals : (1) Any teacher or other employee of a private educational
institution who is dismissed, removed or reduced in rank may within three
months from the date of corn munication of the order prefer an appeal to
the appellate authority of the institution concerned or the Tribunal.
(2) The provisions of sections 4 and 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963, shall
be applicable to such an appeal.
(3) If, before the date of commencement of this Act, any teacher or other
employees has been dismissed, or removed or reduced in rank or his
appointment has been otherwise terminated and any appeal preferred
before that date :
(a) by him against such dismissal or removal or reduction in rank or
termination : or

(b) by him or bx the Govemmg Council againq any order made in
any appeal referred tom clause (a) :
is pending before any officer, such appeal shall, notwithstanding
anything in sub-section ( 1 ). stand transferred to the appellate
authority of the institution concerned or the Tribunal. ifhe makes
an application in that behal r to such officer.
( 4) The appellate authority of the institution concerned or the Tribunal
shall dispose of the appeal filed under sub-section ( 1) or transferred
under sub-section (3) after giving the parties the opportunity of being
heard.
(5) In respect of an order imposing a penalty other than those specified
in sub-section (1) of section 89. on any teacher or other employee. an
appeal shall lie to the competent authority within three months from
the date of communication of the order imposing such penalty.
( 6) The competent authority shall dispose of an appeal preferred under
sub-section (5) after giving the parties the opportunity of being heard.
(7) An appeal against an order of the competent authority under sub­
section (6) shall lie « iihin the prescribed period to the Tribunal whose
decision shall be final.
92. Court Fee : Notwithstanding anything in the law for the time being in
force in the State of Arunachal Pradesh. every appeal to the Tribunal
shall bear a court fee stamp as may be prescribed.
93. Tribunal : ( 1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette constitute one or more Educational Appellate Tribunals for the
adjudication of appeals preferred under this Act and where more than one
Tribunal is constituted. the State GO\ ernment shall specify the territorial
jurisdiction of each such Tribunal.
(2) The Educational Appellate Tribunal shall consist of one person who
is or has been a judicial officer not below the rank ofa District Judge:
Provided that pending constitution of the Educational
Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 1) the District Judge of each
District shall function as the Educational Appellate Tribunal of the
District.
(3) The Educational Appellate Tribunal :-
(a) may, if satisfied from the material on record that the order is
arbitrary, perverse. malafide. violative of the rules ofnaturaljustice
or not sustainable on any other ground. pass such orders
including one for the reinstatement of the employee, a, it deems
fa on such terms and conditions, if any, including payment of
salary, allowances and costs :

(b) shall for the purposes of the disposal of the appeals referred
under this Act have the same powers as are vested in a court of
appeal under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of
1908):
( c) shall have the power to stay the operation of the order appealed
against on such te1111S as it may think fit ;
( d) shall for the purpose of executing its own orders have the same
powers as arc vested in a court executing a decree of a civil court
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act S of 1908) as
if such order were decrees of a civil court.
( 4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be borne
from out of the Consolidated Fund of the State.
(5) NoCivil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of matters over which
the Tribunal exercises any power under this Act.
94. Resignation: ( 1) Any employee of a private educational institution may
resign his service by giving a notice to the Governing Council in accordance
with sub-section (2).
(2) Every such notice ofresignation shall :
(a) conforrn to the terms and conditions of service governing such
employee : and
(b) be in the prescribed form attested by an officer duly authorized
in this behalf by the State Government.
(3) No resignation which is not in accordance with sub-section (2) shall
be valid or be of any effect whatsoever.
95. Retrenchment of employees : Where retrenchment of any employee is
rendered necessary by the Governing Council or competent authority
consequent on any change relating to education or course of instruction
or due to any other reason, such retrenchment may be effected with the
prior approval of the competent authority or the next higher authority, as
the case may be.
96. Termination of service: An employee of a private educational institution
who has been confirmed.and whose services are retrenched or terminated
by the Governing Council for reasons other than as a measure of
punishment shall be entitled to compensation at the rate as may be
prescribed by such private educational institution with the approval of
the State Government.
97. Over-riding effect of this Chapter: The provisions of this chapter shall
have effect notwithstanding anything in :
(i) any law for the time being in force: or

(ii) any award, agreement or contract of service made before or
after the date of commencement of this Act ; or
(iii) any judgment, decree or order of a Court, Tribunal or any
other authority ;
Provided that where under any such law, award,
agreement contract of service judgment, decree or order or
otherwise, any employee is entitled to benefits more
favourable than accorded under this chapter such teacher
or other employee shall continue to be entitled to such
benefits ;
Provided further that nothing in the chapter shall
preclude the teacher or other employee from entering into
employment shall continue to be entitled to such favourable
benefits.
98. Power of Government to impose penalties: - Notwithstanding anything
contained in sections 89 and 91 and subject to such rules as may be
prescribed, where the competent authority is of the opinion that disciplinary
action against an employee is necessary, it may direct the Governing
Council to take action within a specified period. If the Governing Council
fails to comply with the direction, the competent authority shall report the
matter to the State Government, which after considering the report may
specify by order, a person or authority to take disciplinary action against
the employee. The person or authority so specified may thereupon take
disciplinary action against the employee and impose all or any of the
penalties which the Governing Council can impose. An appeal shall lie
from a decision of such person or authority to the Tribunal, within the
prescribed period.
CHAPTER-XV
Control of Private Educational Institution
99. Code of Conduct for Governing Council : The Governing Council of
private educational institutions shall be governed by such code of conduct
as the State Government may prescribe. In such other matters arising
under this Act and not covered by the Code of Conduct aforesaid, the
Governing Council shall be governed by such Code of Conduct prepared
by it with the prior approval of the State Government as is not inconsistent
with the Code of Conduct prescribed by the State Government which shall
be communicated to the competent authority for information.
100. Furnishing oflist of properties : (1) Every private educational institution
shall, maintain a list of the properties, both movable and immovable owned
or possessed by it.

(2) The management shall, on or before the prescribed date, furnish to
the competent authority a copy of such list in the manner and form as
may be prescribed.
101. Utilization offunds, etc : (1) All monies collected, grants received and all
property held by the management on behalf of a private educational
institution shall be utilized for the prescribed purposes and the purposes
for which they are intended and shall be accounted for by the private
educational institution in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The funds of the private educational institution shall be deposited
by it in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Governing Council shall, within a time which the competent
authority may fix, reimburse to the account of the private educational
institution any money which it has failed to account for under sub­
section (1). If the money is not so reimbursed within the time so
fixed, the competent authority shall recover the same from the
Governing Council, as arrears of land revenue and credit it to the
account of the institution.
102. Private Institution not to be closed down, etc., without sufficient notice:­
( I) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no private educational
institution shall be closed down or discontinued, unless a notice of not
less than one academic year and indicating the intention to do so, has
been given by the Governing Council to the officer authorized or prescribed
by the competent authority in this behalf.
(2) On the closure of a recognized private educational institution, all its
properties relatable to the grant-in-aid given by the State Government
as may be determined by the competent authority shall vest in the
State Government.
103. Governing Council to hand over properties, records, etc., to competent
authority on closure, etc., of private educational institution:- (1) In the
event of the private educational institution being closed down or
discontinued or its recognition being withdrawn the Governing Council
shall hand over or cause to be handed over to the competent authority
the custody of all the properties, records and accounts of the institution
in his possession.
(2) (a) Where the competent authority is resisted in or prevented
from obtaining the custody of properties, records or account of
the institution by such management, any Judicial Magistrate of
the first class having jurisdiction shall, on an application made
by the competent authority, by order, after notice to the Governing
Council, direct the handing over of the custody of such properties,
records or accounts of the institution to the competent authority
within the time specified in such order ;

(b) Where the Governing Council fails to hand over the custody of
the properties, records or accounts within the time specified in
the order of the Magistrate under clause (a), it shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both, and the
Magistrate shall cause the custody of the properties, records or
accounts to be handed over to the competent authority taking
such police assistance as may be necessary.
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to a private educational institution
under management of a charitable or religious institution, charitable
or religious endowment or wakf.
I 04. Restriction on alienation of property of private educational
institution:-(]) Notwithstanding anything in any law for the time being
in force. no sale, mortgage, lease, pledge, charge or transfer of possession
in respect of any property of a private educational institution shall be
made or created except with the previous permission in writing of the
competent authority on an application made in this behalf.
(2) (a) No permission applied for under sub-section (1) shall be refused
by the competent authority except where the grant of such
permission will in its opinion, adversely affect the working of the
institution :
(b) The competent authority shall pass an order either granting or
refusing permission applied for, within a period of sixty days
from the date of receipt of the application.
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order refusing permission under sub­
section (2) may, in such manner and within such time, as may be
prescribed, appeal to the prescribed authority.
( 4) Any transaction made in contravention of sub-section (1) shall be
null and void.
105. Liability of Secretary to repay debts incurred in certain cases:- Where
any Secretary incurs a debt for the purpose of running a private
educational institution without proper authorization by the Governing
Council or the Managing Committee as the case may be as such institution
and where it is found by the competent authority after making an enquiry
that the monies received through such debts have not been utilized for
running the institution. It shall be the personal liability of such Secretary
to discharge the said debts.

CHAPTER- XVI
State Educational Advisory Council, etc.
106. State Educational Advisory Council :- ( 1) For the purpose of advising the
Government on matters pertaining to educational policies and programmes.
the State Government, shall, by notification, constitute a State Educational
Advisory Council, (hereinafter referred to as the Council) consisting of
officials and non-officials.
(2) The Minister (Education) shall be the Chairman and the other
Minister concerned, if any, shall be the Co-Chaimrnn and the
Minister of State, if any, shall be the Vice-Chairman of the Council.
(3) The Commissioner/Secretary (Education) Government ofArunachal
Pradesh shall be the Member-Secretary.
( 4) The Council shall also consist of the following members >
(a) The Vice Chancellor of the Raj iv Gandhi University, Arunachal
Pradesh constituted under Raj iv Gandhi University Act, 2006
(No. 8 of2007)
(b) The Vice Chancellor of State University if any:
(c) The Principal Chief Conservator ofForest;
(d) The Director of School Education, the Director of Higher &
Technical Education, Director of Health Services, the Director
of Sports & Youth Affairs, the Director of Social Welfare,
Women and Child Development. the Director of Agriculture,
the Director ofHorticulture, the Director of AYU SH.
(e) The Director/Dean of the College of Horticulture and
Forestry ;
(f) The nominated members of each of the Standing Committee
constituted under section 107 ;
(g) Not exceeding ten members nominated by the State Government
of whom one shall be from reputed NGOs working in the State,
one shall be woman and one member shall be a reputed social
worker.
(5) The powers and functions and term of members shall be such as
may be prescribed.
107. Standing Committee : (1) There shall be a StanC:'.ng. Committee of the
State Educational Advisory Council for the School Educc:tion, Teacher
Education, Adult Education etc.

(2) The standing committee shall consist the following members :
(a) The Director of School Education Chairman
(b) The Principal, SIE Member
(c) The Joint Director of School Member
Education (E)
(d) The Joint Director of School Member
Education (P)
(e) The Joint Director of School Member
Education(A)
(f) The Deputy Director of School Member
Education (TE)
(g) The Principal Govt. Higher Member
Secondary School (any one)
(h) One educationist to be nominated Member
(i) One teacher from Govt. school Member
(3) The State Government shall constitute a Standing Committee of the
State Educational Advisory Council for the Elementary Education if
feels necessary and expedient, the composition of which shall be
such as may be prescribed.
( 4) The powers and functions and term of office of the members of the
Standing Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
108. Advisory Committee : (I) The State Government may constitute separate
Advisory Committees for Elementary Education, Secondary Education,
Vocational Education, Adult Education, Teacher Education, Commerce
Education, Art and Craft Education, Physical Education, Education of
Girls and Women, and for such other disciplines as may be deemed
necessary.
(2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of official
and non-official members, not exceeding nine, as may be prescribed.
The State Government shall appoint one of the members to be the
Chairperson of each committee and also appoint Secretary to each
committee.
(3) The powers and functions and term of office of the members of the
Committee sh.1:11 be such as may be prescribed.
109. Procedure of Meetings : The procedure to be followed at the meeting of
the State Educational Advisory Council and the Advisory Committee
shall be such as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER-XVII
Penalties
110. Penalty for contravention of section 18 : ( 1) If any person fails to furnish
any information as required under sub-section ( 4) of section 18, he shall,
on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to one hundred
rupees.
(2) if any parent fails to comply with an attendance order passed under
twenty rupees and in the case of a continuing contrayention, with an
additional fine not exceeding ten rupees for every day during which
such contravention continues after conviction for the first of such
contraventions ;
Provided that the amount of fine in any one year shall not
exceed five hundred rupees.
111. Penalty for contravention of section 19 : If any person contravenes the
provisions of section 19, he shall, on conviction, be punished with fine
which may extend to fifty rupees and in the case of a continuing
contravention, with an additional fine not exceeding ten rupees for every
day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the
first of such contraventions ;
Provided that the amount of fine in any one year shall not exceed
five hundred rupees.
112. Penalty for contravention of section 23 : Any person who contravenes
the provisions of section 23 shall on conviction, be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one week or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.
113. Penalty for ragging : (1) No person who is a student in an educational
institution shall commit ragging.
(2) Any person who contravenes sub-section (1) shall on conviction, be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two weeks
or with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees
or with both.
114. Penalty for copying at examination: Whoever is found by an invigilator
or any other person appointed to supervise the conduct of an examination
contravening section 24 shall, on convictio= \:,P punished with an
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one v eek or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.

S. Penalty for impersonating at examination : Any person who contravenes
the provisions of section 25 shall be punished with imprisonment for a
tc1111 which may extend to two weeks or with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees or with both.
I 16. Punishment for loitering, etc., near an examination centre : Any person
who contra. cues the provisions of section 26 shall. on conviction, be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one week or
\\ ith fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both.
117. Punishment for alteration of answers written at an examination: (1) Any
person who contravenes the provisions of section 27 shall. on conviction,
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two weeks
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.
(2J Any person who commits any offence affecting the body or against
the property of any person entrusted with any work relating to or
appointed in connection with any examination shall. on conviction,
he punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to t\VO
weeks or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or
With both.
118. Prohibition of other malpractices at examinations, ctc r- Any person who
adopts or takes recourse to any malpractice other than those punishable
under sections 112. 1 I 4, 115. 116 and 1 I 7 shall. on conviction, be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one week or with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both.
119. Punishment for contravention of section 28: Any person, who. without
reasonable excuse, refuses to do any work connected with any
examination and assigned to him, shall on conviction, be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one week or with fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees or with both.
120. Penalty for establishing unregistered educational institutions erc r- Any
person. who, establishes or as the case may be, maintains or runs an
educational institution in contravention of section 29 or after registration
is refused for such institution under section 30 or cancelled under section
3, shall on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for term which
may extend to two weeks or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees or with both.
121. Penalty for maintaining or running unregistered tutorial
institutions: (!) Any person who maintains or runs a tutorial intuition
in contravention of the provisions of clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of

obtaining the registration certificate under sub-section (2) of the said
section or who after the cancellation of the registration certificate issued
to him under that sub-section continues to run such an institution, shall,
on conviction. be punished with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees ;
Provided that for a second or any subsequent conviction under this
section, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two weeks or with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees or with both.
122. Penalty for collecting money in contravention of section 50:- Where any
educational institution is found to be collecting money in contravention
of the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 50, every person, who at
the time of such collection was in-charge of, and shall be responsible to
the institution for its management shall, on conviction, shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one week or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. On such
conviction the institution shall refund the monies so collected to the
person from whom it was collected.
123. Penalty for contravention of code of conduct by Governing Council:­
Where any Governing Council intentionally or knowingly contravenes
any code of conduct presc-ibed in sub-section (I) of section 99, every
member thereof, shall without prejudice to any other section as may be
'taken under this Act and the rules made thereunder, be punished, on
conviction. with fine not exceeding two thousand rupees for every such
contravention.
124. Penalty for failure to give notice of closure ofinstitutions:- If the Governing
Council of any private educational institution fails to give the notice
required under sub-section ( 1) of section 102, every member thereof shall
on conviction be punished with simple imprisonment which may extend
to one week or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or
with both.
125, Penalties not otherwise provided for:- If any person contravenes or
attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act or rules made thereunder other than those punishable under
the provisions herein before contained, he shall, on conviction, be
punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for every
such contravention.
126. Offences by companies:- (]) Where an offence against any of the
provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder has been committed
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed,

as to the regularity, correctness, legality or propriety of any decision or
order passed therein, and if, in any case it appears to the State Government
that any such decision or order should be modified, annulled or reversed
or remitted for reconsideration, they may pass order accordingly :
Provided that the State Government shall not pass any order
adversely affecting any party unless such party has had an opportunity
of making a representation.
(2) The State Government may stay the execution of any such decision
or order pending the exercise of powers under sub-section ( 1) in
respect thereof.
(3) Every application preferred under sub-section (1) shall be made
within such time and in such manner and accompanied by such fees
as may be prescribed.
129. Review : (1) The State Government or the Commissioner (Education) or
the Director of School Education may suo motu at any time or on an
application received from any person interested within ninety days of the
passing of any order under the provisions of this Act review any such
order, if it was passed by them or him under any mistake, whether of fact or
oflaw, or in ignorance of any material fact.
(2) The provisions contained in the proviso to sub-section ( 1) and in
sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 128 shall, so far may be, apply in
respect of any proceeding under this section as they apply to a
proceeding under sub-section ( 1) of that section.
130. Powers of Government to give directions:-(!) The State Government may,
subject to other provisions of this Act, by order, direct the Commissioner
(Education) or the Director of School Education or any other officer not
below the rank of the Deputy Director of School Education to make an
enquiry or to take appropriate proceeding under this Act in respect of any
matter specified in the said order and the Director of School Education or
the other officer, as the case may be, shall report to the State Government
in due course the result of the enquiry made or the proceedings taken by
him.
(2) The State Government may give such directions to any educational
institution or tutorial institution as in its opinion are necessary or
expedient for carrying out the purposes of this Act or to give effect to
any of the provisions contained therein or of any rules or orders made
thereunder and the Governing Council or the owner, as the case may
be, of such institution shall comply with every such direction.
(3) The State Government may also give such directions to the officers or
authorities under its control as in its opinion are necessary or expedient
for carrying out the purpose of this Act, and it shall be the duty of
such officer or authority to comply with such directions.

131. Power to enter and inspect : ( 1) Every officer not below such rank as
may be prescribed shall. subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
be competent to enter at any time during the normal working hours of an
educational or tutorial institution. any premises of any such institution
within his jurisdiction and to inspect any record, register or other
documents or any movable or immovable property relating to such
institution for the purpose of exercising his powers and perfom1ing his
functions under this Act.
(2) Any officer authorized by the State Government in this behalf, may at
any time during the normal working hours of any educational
institution enter such institution or any premises thereof or any
premises belonging to the Governing Council of such institution, if
he has reason to believe that there is or has been any contravention
of the provisions of this Act and search and inspect any record,
accounts, register or other documents belonging to such institution
or of the Governing Council, in so far as any such record. accounts,
register or other document relates to such institution and seize any
such record, accounts, register or other documents for the purpose of
ascertaining whether there is or has been any such contravention.
(3) In order to secure proper and effective utilization of the finances or
resources or other assets of any educational institution in existence
at the commencement of this Act it shall be competent for the State
Government to invoke the provisions of sub-section (2) and ascertain
such finances, resources and assets of any institution and after such
ascertainment to give such directions to the Governing Council as
they deem fit.
( 4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act
of 1974) relating to searches and seizure shall apply, so far as may be
to searches and seizures under sub-section (2).
132. Penalty for obstructing officer or other person exercising powers under
this Act: Any person who obstructs an officer of the State Government
in the exercise of any power conferred on him or in the performance of
any function entrusted to him by or under this Act or any other person
lawfully assisting such officer in the exercise of such power or in the
performance of such function or who fails to comply with any lawful
direction made by such officer or person shall be punished with fine
which may extend to two thousand rupees.
133. Protection: No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie
against any authority, officer or any person of the State Government
authorized or prescribed to perform any duty for anything done or intended
to be done in good faith by or under this Act or the rules made thereunder.

134. Investigation and cognizance of offences:- (1) No court shall take
cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act, except under
sections 112 to 119 (both inclusive) or the abetment of any such offence,
save on complaint made by the competent authority or with the previous
sanction of such authority.
(2) All offences punishable under sections 112 to 119 (both inclusive)
shall-
( a) be investigated by an officer of and above the rank ofinspector
of Police ; and
(b) be cognizable and non-bailable:
Provided that where the accused is a woman, she shall be
released on bail on her offering a personal bond for her
appearance during the stage of investigation or trial.
135. Punishment for abetment ofoffences : Whoever instigates or abets the
commission of any offence punishable under this Act shall, on conviction,
be punished with the punishment provided for the offence.
136. Enquiry and proceedings : All proceedings or enquiries before the tribunal
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections
193,219 and 288 of the Indian Panel Code, 1860 (Centra!Act45 of 1860).
7. Application of the Act to certain institutions:- Nothing in this Act or the
rules made thereunder shall apply to any minority educational institutions
to the extent they are inconsistent with the rights guaranteed under Article
of the Constitution oflndia.
138. Officers and persons to be a public servant:- For the purpose of this Act
every person appointed under or exercising any power conferred by and
under this Act shall be deemed to be public servant within the meaning of
139. Interpretation of the provisions of this Act and removal of difficulties:­
All the words and provisions of this Act shall be interpreted with the
meaning assigned to the words with all its cognate expressions given in
this Act. If any difficulty arises in interpreting of any of the words or the
provisions of this Act, then the Arunachal Pradesh Interpretation and
General Clauses Act 1982 (Act No.3 of 1982) or any other law for the time
being in force shall be referred to and the interpretation the State
Government with the aids and advice of its counsel shall be final. If any
difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State
Government may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with
the said provisions as appear to them to be necessary or expedient to
remove the difficulty.

140. Delegation :- The State Government may by notification in the Official
Gazette, delegate all or any powers exercisable by it under this Act or
rules made thereunder, in relation to such matter and subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, to be exercised
also by such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government as
may be specified in the notification.
141. Power to make rules :- ( 1) The State Government may, by notification
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such rules may provide for ;
(i) the classes or standards of education and up to which shall
be considered as elementary education;
(ii) the curricula, etc., specified under sub-section (1) of
(iii) the duties and functions of the Vigilance Cells;
(iv) the authorities and the manner in which appointments are
to be made to the posts sanctioned under sub-section (2)
of section 9 and the powers and functions of the officers
and staff;
(v) the composition and powers of the Boards constituted
under section 10;
(vi) the steps to be taken for providing necessary facilities for
imparting free and compulsory elementary education ;
(vii) the manner in which lists of children shall be prepared by
the attendance authority ;
(viii) the distance beyond which a child cannot be compelled to
attend an approved school ;
(ix) the manner in which any enquiry under this Act shall be
passed ;
( x) the form in which an attendance order under this Act shall
be held;
(xi) the registers, statements, reports, returns, budgets and
other information to be maintained or furnished by approved
schools for the purpose of this Act ;
(xii) the declaration as to what constitutes elementary, secondary
or higher secondary education, school place, school age
and attendance in schools or other institutions ;

(xiii) the establishment or maintenance and administration of
educational institutions and hostel administration ;
(xiv) the grant of registration or recognition to educational
institutions and the conditions therefore ;
(xv) the period and the manner for applying for registration of
institutions ;
(xvi) the form of the register maintained for registration of
educational institutions and tutorial institutions and of the
registration certificate ;
(xvii) the manner of submission of the report of the expert body;
(xviii) the conditions for recognition of existing institutions and
the procedure therefor ;
(xix) regulation of the rates of fees, the levy and collection of
fees in educational institutions ;
(xx) the manner in which accounts, registers, records and other
documents shall be maintained in the educational
institutions and the authority responsible for such
maintenance ;
(xxi) the submission of returns, statements, reports and accounts
by managements or owners of properties of educational or
tutorial institutions ;
(xxii) the inspection of educational and tutorial institutions and
the officers by whom inspection shall be made ;
(xxiii) the mode of keeping and the auditing of accounts of such
institutions ;
(xxiv)the standards of education and courses of study in
educational institutions ;
(xxv) the grant of sums by the State Government to educational
institutions towards providing scholarships, bursaries, fee
concessions and the like ;
(xxvi)the preparation and submission of development plan for
educational institutions in general and the contents of such
plans;

(xxvii) the powers and the functions of the officers and other
subordinate staff of the Education Department ;
(xxviii.) the preparation and sanction of building plans and estimates
of the educational institutions and the requirements to be
fulfilled by the buildings for the educational institutions
maintained by the local authorities and private institutions:
(xxix) the purposes for which the premises of the educational
institutions may be used and the restrictions and
conditions subject to which such premises may be used
for any other purpose;
(xxx) the regulation of the use of text books, maps, plans,
instruments and other laboratory and sports equipments
and other similar requirement in the institutions:
(xxxi) the regulations for admission into educational institutions
of pupils for the academic course, private study and other
special courses and the attendance thereat;
(xxxii) the qualifications necessary and other conditions to be
fulfilled for appearing at the examinations conducted by
the authorities under this Act and the method of valuation
or revaluation of answer scripts ;
(xxxiii)the manner of conducting the class and formative and
summative test or examination/ or CCE and promotion uf
pupils to higher classes ;
(xxxiv)the donations or contributions and the conditions subject
to which they may be accepted by the educational institu­
tions from the public and the naming of institutions :
(xxxv)the conditions for co-education in the educational
institutions and the regulation of the conduct and discipline
of pupils and the penalty for misconduct or indiscipline ;
(xxxvi)the manner of serving of notices, orders and other
proceedings, of presenting appeals or applications for
revision or review and the procedure for dealing with them
and the fee in respect thereof:
(xxxvii)the scale of fees or charges ur the manner of fixing fees or
charges payable in respect of any certificate, permission
marks lists or other document for which such fees may be
collected ;

(xx.xviii) all matters connected with the transfer and posting of
teachers under Education Department ;
(xxxix) all matters connected with recruitment rules of teaching
and non-teaching up to Group-'A' (Gazetted) post of the
Education Department ;
(xl) all matters connected with streamlining of cadre posts and
classification of posts of Education Department.
(xli) all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be
prescribed or in respect of which this Act makes no
provision or makes insufficient provision and a provision
is, in the opinion of the State Government, necessary for
the proper implementation of this Act.
142. Laying of rules before Legislative Assembly :- Every rule made by the
Government of Arunachal Pradesh under this Act shall be laid before the
Legislative Assembly of Arunachal Pradesh while it is in session for a
total period of ten days which may be comprised of in one session or in
two or more successive sessions and if before expiry of the session in
which it is so laid or the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, the Legislative Assembly makes any
modification in the rule or resolves that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect as the case may be so however that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
143. Savings :- Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all rules,
orders, notifications, Grant-in-aid Codes, appointments, schemes, bye­
laws, regulations, official memoranda, circulars or any other order made
or issued before the commencement of this Act and in force on the date
-of such commencement providing for or relating to any of the matter for
the furtherance of which this Act is enacted shall continue to be in force
and effective as if they are made under the corresponding provisions of
this Act unless and until superseded by anything done or any action
taken or any notification, Grant-in-aid Code, rule, order, appointment,
scheme, bye-law, regulation, official memorandum, circular or any other
order made or issued under this Act.
C.P. Mansai,
Secretary to the
Government of Arunachal Pradesh,
Itanagar.

THE ARUNACHAL PRADESH STATE COUNCIL FOR
TECHNICAL EDUCATION ACT, 2010
(ACT NO. 9 OF 2010)
(Received the assent of the Governor on 20th April, 2010 and
published in theArunachal Pradesh E.O. Gazette No. 45, Vol. XVII
dated 20th May, 20 I 0)
AN
ACT
to provide for regulation, establishment, working of Institutions and
constitution of State Council for Technical Education in the State ofArunachal
Pradesh and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto ;
BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arunachal Pradesh in
the Sixty- first Year of the Republic ofindia as follows:-
Chapter-I
Preliminary
Short title Extent
and commence­
ment
Definitions. (1) This Act may be called the Arunachal Pradesh
State Council for Technical Education Act, 20 I 0.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of
Arunachal Pradesh and applicable to all the
colleges and /or the institutions of Technical
Education be it Government, Non-Govenunent
Institution situated within the territorial
jurisdiction of the State of Arunachal Pradesh,
imparting technical/professional education within
the concept of University Grants Commission or
All India Council ofTechnical Education or within
the concept of any Council created by Government
ofindia to regulate a particular technical education
and recognised by the department of Higher and
Technical Education of the State.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the State
Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint.
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(1) "Technical Education" - means special branch of
education, training and research in the field of
engineering/technology/professional education