THE ARUNACHAL PRADESH WATER SUPPLYACI, 2OI5
(ACT NO. 3 ()F 20r 7)
(Received the ossent of the Governor on l lth April, 2017 ond published in the Arunochol Prodesh E.O Gozette No.ll6 Vo.. XXIV doted 26th April, 2017)
fui Act to regulote woter supply including levy of reosonoble toriff on consumption of piped woter supply in the Stote of Arunochol Prodesh ond motters conneded therewith and incidental thereto;
BE it enocted by the Legislotive Assembly ofArunochol Prodesh in the Sixty-sixth Yeor of the Republic of lndio os follows:Chopter - |
Preliminory l. Short title ond commencement: (1) ThisAct moy be colled the Arunochol Prodesh Woter Supply Act, 201 5.
(2) lt sholl extend to the whole ofArunochol Prodesh.
(3) lt sholl come into force on the dote of its publicotion in the Officiol Gozette.
2. Delinitions: ln this, unless the context otherwise requires(o) 'Act meons the Arunochol Prodesh Woter SupplyAct,20l5.
(b) 'Assistont Enginee/ meons, on Assistont Engineer in chorge of o Sub-division or equivolent ronk of the Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment.
(c) 'Chief Engineer' meons the Chief Engineer of Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment.
(d) 'Competent outhority meons ond includes Chief Engineer, Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment or ony other officer like Superintending Engineer, Executive Engineer, Assistont Engineer ond Junior Engineer oI Public Heolth Engineerlng ond Woter Supply Deportment outhorized by him in this beholf.

(e) 'Consumer' meons owner (s) or occupier (s) of ony building or premises provided with woter connection either by piped connection or by hond pump, tube well or well or tonker by the Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment.
(0 ' Consumer of Woter' meons who uses the woter supplied by the deportment.
(g) 'Consumers Moin' meons woter pipes which connect Government Moin with consume/s premises ond includes service pipe ond internol plumbing line of the consumer's premises.
(h) 'Deportment' meons Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment, of the Government of Arunochol Prodesh.
(i) ' Executive Engineer' meons the Executive Engineer inchorge ol o Division in Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment.
(j)'Fire Hydront' meons hydrontfixed on the woter moin other thon the trunk moin for offording supply of woter for extinguishing ony fire;
(k) 'Government' meqns the government of Arunochol Prodesh.
(l) 'Government Moin' meons woter pipeline for the purpose oI giving o generol supply of woter which includes ony opporotus used in connedion with such o pipe ond which is mointoined by the Government.
(m) 'Junior Engineer' meons o Junior Engineer of Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment in chorge of o section.
(n) 'Locol Body' meons o City Corporotion, o Municipol Council or o Villoge or Nogor Ponchoyat.
(o) ' Ownel , in relotion to ony premises, meons the person who receives the rent of thot premises or who would be entitled to receive the rent thereof if the premises were let, ond includes,(i) on ogent or trustee who receives such rent on beholf ol the owner;
(ii) on ogent or trustee who receives the rent of, or is entrusted with the monogement of ony premises devoted to religious or choritoble purposes;
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)24
(iii) o receiver or monoger oppointed by ony court of competent iurisdiction to hove the chorge of, or to exercise the rights ol on owner of soid premises;
ond
(iv) o mortgogee in possession.
' Premises' meons ony lond or building ond includes(i) the gorden, lond ond outhouses, if ony, oppertoining to o building or port of building; ond
(ii) ony fitting offixed to o building or port of o building for more beneficiol enjoyment thereof .
' Public Hydront'meons hydront meontfor supply ofwoter to the public within o locol oreo;
' Ru les' meons ony rules mode under this AcU
'Superintending Engineer' meons Superintending Engineer in chorge of o Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment Circle.
' Semi Urbon' meons other DiskictTowns, Sub-Divisionol towns, Circle Heodquorters which ore not yet declored/
notified os Urbon Towns by the Government ofArunochol Prodesh'Section' meons o section of the Act;
'Service Line' meons the portion of consumer moin storting from the point where consumer moin joins the Government moin upto the point in the consumer moin where woter meter is instolled.
'Top' meons ony outlet or inlet instolled for extrocting woter from consumer pipeline connected to Government woter pipeline. Some of specific exomples of tops ore bibcock, inlet to cistern, shower, stop cock, boll cock fixed ot reservoir etc.
'Urbon' meons the Stote Copitol or District Towns declored/notified os Urbon Towns by the Government of Arunochol Prodesh.
' Woter Connection' includes(i) ony tonk, cistern, hydront, stond-pipe, meter or top situoted on a,ny premises or property ond connected with o moin or the distribution pipe; ond(u)
(v)
(w)
(x)
(y)

(ii) the woter pipe connecting such o tonk, cistern,
hydront stond pipe, meter or top with such moin or distribution pipe;
(z) 'Woter Supply' meons o system of providing woter to o community for meeting its requirements both domestic ond non-domestic, but does not include providing woter for inigotion purposes.
Chopter - ll Provision of woter ond collection of toriff
3. (l) Provision of Woter: (o) The deportment sholl on on opplicotion mode to it by the owner of ony premises or by the occupierwith the consent in writing ofthe ownerthereof, gront supply of woter for domestic purposes under this Act excepl the following, nomely:(i) for ony trade, monufacture or business;
(ii) for gordens or for purposes of irrigotion;
(iii) for building purposes including construction ond wotering of roads or streets;
(iv) for public both or tonks or for ony ornomentol or mechonicol purpose5
(v) for onimols where they ore kept for sole or hire or for the sole of thet produce or ony preporotion therefrom;
(b) No person sholl use or be ollowed to use woter supply for ony purpose other thon domestic purpose except with the previous opprovol of the competent outhority.
(c) No person sholl, without the permission of the competent outhority moke or couse to be mode ony connection with the Government moin pipeline.
(d) Notwithstonding onything contoined in ony other low for the time being in force or ony deed executed under this Act or rules mode thereunder, the Government or its officers ond employees sholl not be lioble for ony domoge or penolty for, discontinuing the supply of woter or foilure to supply woter to ony person or to ony oreo if the couse of such loilure is beyond the control ol the Government,
its oflicers ond employees.

(2) Procedure for woter connection(l) Applicotion lor woter connection
(o) An opplicotion for woter supply connection from the Government Moin sholl be mode in Form W/S - I by duly filling in oll the requisite informotion sought therein.
(b) Applicotion Forms con be hod during office hours from the office of the Executive Engineer, Public Heolth Engineering & Woter Supply Division, on poyment of { l0 (rupees ten) only
(c) The duly filled up Applicotion Form should be submitted olong with the Site plon in the office of the Executive Engineer, Public Heolth Engineering &
Woter Supply Division showing lollowing detoils.
(i) All units, such os Kitchen, out house, etc (not oltoched to the building) where woter is proposed to be token.
(ii) All roods, footpoth ond droins to be crossed by the consumer line.
(ll) Approvol for Woter Supply Connection:(o) After the receipt of the opplicotion, the Deportment sholl prepore o Doto Sheet in Form W/S-ll ond moke necessory corrections in site plon, verify doto ond corry out other necessory scrutiny of the opplicotion.
(b) The CompetentAuthority shollthereolter opprove the connection point, method of the connection,
connection fees to be poid by opplicont , woter tox ond/ or woter chorges if he is sotisfied thot the doto os sought-for in the Applicotion Form ond other procedures hove been correctly obided ond met by the opplicont.
(3) lntimotion to opplicont lor moking Poyment {or Water Connection :- The opplicont sholl, thereofter, be informed through on intimotion letter in duplicote in Form WS -lll indicoting omount of connection fee ond other chorges os moy be opplicoble. The opplicont sholl, thereofter, return the originol Form duly signed, olong with the Bonk Receipt for the omount poid os cost ol the Form.

(4) Gront of Permission:- Consequent upon poyment of the required omount bythe opplicont under sub-clouse (b) ofclouse (ll) of section 3, the competent outhority sholl issue o letter in Form WS-lV permitting the connedion of consumer's moin from the Government moin os per the procedures stipuloted under the provisions of the Act ond os per the directions communicoted to the opplicont.
(5) Method of Loying of Consumer Pipelines:(o) The connection sholl be provided to the ground floor or ony other floor below the ground floor of ony building. For li{ting of woter to higher levels, the owner sholl moke his own orrongement with prior opprovol of the competent outhority.
(b) All pipes ond fittings including meters, pumps, tonks ond occessories sholl be of opproved lndion Stondord lnstitute specificotion.
(c) Pipe must be buried minimum one foot underground in oll coses. They con be exposed obove ground, provided underground conceoling is not possible for which the prior opprovol of the deportment sholl be obtoined.
(d) All pipe loy outs should be in geometricol form ond should present oesthetic look.
(e) Sizes of pipes ond tops in oll coses sholl be holf inch
( l5mm) in dio unless otherwise opproved by the Deportment in writing.
({) No pipe sholl be loid odjocent to sewer lines or droins unless the pipe is encosed inside Cement Concrete or Reinforced Cement Concrete beom ond is opproved by the Deportment.
(g) All the connections sholl be corried out by Licensed/
designoted Deportment plumbers only.
(6) Supply of Woter to Government Agencies, etc :
(i) Where the Deportment ogrees to supply bulk woter or ony quontity of woter to Government ogencies, institutions, or Defense orgonizotions, such Government ogencies,
institutions or defense orgonizotion shqll Iurnish oll the relevont detoils os moy be sought by the deportment prior to opprovol ond provide oll such informotion in monners stipuloted under sub-section (2) ond ollotment of fund.

(ii) ln cose the Deportment hos to mointoin the Woter Supply of the obove mentioned consumer/porties, the mointenonce cost ossessed by the Deportment sholl be finol ond sholl be borne by the consumer/porties wherever opplicoble.
(7) LicensedPlumbers:(i) The Superintending Engineel hoving iurisdiction over the oreo, on recommendotion of Executive Engineers, sholl oppoint the plumbers from omongst the existing Work Chorged fitters or cosuol lobourers bosed on their performonce, sincerity, bosic procticol knowledge in the field of fitting ond fixing of pipes ond fixtures ond issue license occordingly.
(ii) No person other thon o licensed plumber oppointed by the competent outhority or person duly outhorized by it sholl execute ony work reloting to o woter connection,
not being o work of o triviol noture ond no person sholl permit ony such work to be executed by o person other thon such o person.
(iii) No licensed plumber sholl controvene ony of the specificotions or stondords reloting to execution of such works provided in the Act or specified by the competent outhority or execute such works using sub-stondord moteriols, opplionces or f ittings.
(iv) Where ony such work is executed in controvention of subclouses (ii) ond (iii), such connection is lioble to be refused or disconnected.
(v) No licensed plumber sholl demond or receive ony exlro chorge for ony such work in excess of the estimoted cost opproved by the competent outhority ond the omount deposited to the Executive Engineer.
(vi) lf ony licensed plumber executes ony such works in controvention of provision of this section or regulotions,
his license sholl be suspended or concelled irrespective of whether ony criminol proceeding is token ogoinst him or not.
(vii) Comploint ogoinst ony licensed plumber to the competent outhority, regording violotion of the provisions of this Act,
sholl be filed belore the Executive Engineer, within thirty doys, from the dote of notice of the violotion.

(viii) Executive Engineer sholl dispose of the compliont refened to in sub-clouse (vii) within thirty doys from the dote of receipt.
(ix) Any person oggrieved by the orders of the Executive Engineer, under the foregoing sub-clouse moy oppeol to the Superintending Engineer, hoving jurisdiction over the oreo ond he sholl dispose of the oppeol ofter offording o reosonoble opportunity of being heord to the person concerned. His decision thereon sholl be finol.
(x) Whoever, being o licensed Plumber, controvenes sub clouses (iii) ond (v) of sub-section (7) o{ section 3, sholl be punishoble with imprisonment for o term which moy extend to six months or with fine which moy extend to five thousond rupees or with both.
(8) Provision of Public Hydronts:(i) The competent outhority sholl, subject to poyment by o locol body or orgonizotion, union etc. of such chorges os the outhority moy determine provide supply of wholesome woter to the public of Urbon ond Semi-urbon oreos through the public hydronts within its locol oreo.
(ii) The competent outhority moy, ot the request of the locol body, orgonizotion, union, ossociotion etc. ond sholl, if Government so directs, subiect to poyment of such contribution towords its cost in such monner os moy be prescribed, provide ond mointoin within the locoloreo public hydronts together with oll incidentol works for supply of woter ot such ploces os moy be considered necessory by the locol bodies.
(iii) The locol body, orgonizotion, union or ossociotion sholl poy to the competent outhority quorterly, such sum os moy be fixed by the outhority, towords the cost of woter supplied by it through the public hydronts within its locol oreo on the bosis of expected consumption of woter ond in occordonce with such rule os moy be prescribed.
(iv) The woter from ony public hydront sholl not be used for ony non-domestic purpose.
(v) No externol instruments or pipes or hose or other devices sholl be connected to ony public hydronts for toping woter.
(vi) No cleoning or woshing of ony onimol, vehicle, cloth,
utensil or ony other moteriols sholl be done under or neor ony public hydront.

(9) Provision of Fire Hydronts:(i) The competent outhority moy, ot the request ond expense of the owner or occupier of ony foctory or ony shop or commerciol estoblishment provide ond mointoin fire hydronts, together with oll incidentol work for the supply of woter in cose offire in such foctory shop or commerciol estoblishment ond in ony such cose levy chorge from such owner or occupier the cost of woter supply in connection therewith.
(ii) The competent outhority sholl provide ond mointoin fire hydronts together with oll incidentol works for the supply of woter in cose of fire ot such other ploces os moy be considered necessory by o joint committee of the officers of the deportment ond the Fire Services Deportment of the Government ond supply woter in connection therewith.
(iii) The competent outhority moy olso provide fire hydrontsin villoges provided fund is mode ovoiloble to the deportment.
(10) Provision of Woter Meters:(i) The consumer, ot his own cost, sholl provide o woter meter ot o convenient point of service pipe between the premises ond Government moin ofter obtoining opprovol from the competent outhority.
(ii) All meters, connections, pipes ond other works incidentol to the supply ol woter to ony building or lond sholl be supplied, repoired, extended ond oltered os moy be necessory ot the expenses of the person requiring such supply but sholl remoin under the control of the Government.
(iii) Notwithstonding onyhing contoined in sub-clouse (i), the competent outhority sholl hove the power to instoll its own woter meters to ony connections wherever need orise ond sholl recover the cost of woter meter from the consumer.
(iv) Whenever woter is supplied under this Ad through o meter,
it sholl be presumed thot the quontity indicoted by the meter hos been consumed, until the controry is proved.
ll
4. Collection ol Toriff ond Chorges :(l) The monthly woter bill sholl be prepored by the Executive Engineer or ony other officer outhorized by him ond sholl be served to the consumer within 7 (seven) doys.
(2) The monthly woter chorges sholl be poyoble in the office of the Executive Engineer or ony other officer quthorized by him within the stipuloted time, to be refleded in the bill which will normolly not exceed 30 (thirty) doys from the dote of issue of the bill.
(3) Simple interest ot the rote of l8% per onnum on totol omount due for eoch month sholl be levied if not poid within the stipuloted period.
(4) ln cose ony consumer is in defoult of poyment o{ woter chorges for three consecutive months, the deportment sholl serve o notice in Form-V with woter bill including interest os stoted in sub-section (3) obove. The consumer sholl cleor the bill within 15 doys from the dote of receipt of the notice. lf no poyment is mode within I 5 doys os stipuloted, the house connection sholl be lioble Ior disconnection. ln the event of reconnection being given to the defoulting consumer, the cost of reconnection os estimoted by the deportment ond the connection fee of t 500 olong with pending omount sholl hove to be poid by the de{oulting consumer in odvonce. ln cose due to some other reoson, the bill is not reoched to the consumer within the stipuloted time, it will be the duty of the consumer to enquire obout the missing bill from the office of the Executive Engineer or the outhorized officer os the cose moy be, ond collect o duplicote bill.
(5) The omount reolized towords woter supply chorges by the Executive Engineer/Sub- Divisionol Officer, Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment or ony other outhorized officer os the cose moy be, should be deposited in the Treosury under oppropriote Heod of Account within 7 (seven) doys from the dote of receipt ond o monthly occount ond the some sholl be submitted to Superintending Engineer/Chief Engineer of the deportment.
(6)
(7t
(8)
(e)
00)
s.0)32
All poyments mode by the consumers towords woter chorges for privote connection orfrom Government building sholl be issued proper receipt by the deportment.
The woter bill sholl be collected from the consumers from the dote of completion o, providing woter connection.
ln cose ofbreok in woter supplydue to repoiror construction of the premises or due to chonge of tenonts, the liobility of poyment sholl rest on the owner of the premises.
A revenue collection register sholl be mointoined for eoch sectionol office of urbon ond Semi-urbon towns.
The Executive Engineer sholl cross-check this register every month while depositing the revenue into the Government exchequerfor proper mointenonce of records ond regulor revenue collection."
(i) Rote of woter chorges:- The toble of the rotes of woter chorges where woter meters ore not instolled sholl be os lollowssl.
NoType oI conneciion Revised rotes to be effective from enforcement of the Act.Existing Rote ellective since
01/06/2006No. of dwelling unit
3 4 5
1. New Woter Supply connection Chorge
2. Privote domestic consumer in Urbon oreo
3. Privote domestic consumer in Semiurbon towns/Administrotive HQs{ 2000
{ 100
month I 50 per monthI -3 Bedroom
(per dwelling unit)
4-5 Bedroom
(per dwelling unit)
ond obove
(per dwelling unit)
l-3 Bedroom
(per dwelling unit)
4-5 Bedroom
(per dwelling unit)
ond obove
(per dwelling unit){ 3000
{ 150 per month
{ 300 per month t 400 per month
{ 75 per month t 150 per month t 200 per monthperI ll
2 4
4- Commerciol rote:
A. (i) Luxury hotels (with lounge,
conference, restouronts)
(ii) Budget hotels{ 50 per month/ top
{ 50 per month/ top{ 200 per room/
monfl t 100 per room/
month
{ 2000 per month I I000 per month
{ 200 per room/
month
{ 200/per room/
monfr continue < 50
per month/top
{ 5 per studenv monfr tl00 per shop/
month
{ I00 per month
{ 50 per/ top/monttr
{ I00 per month
< 200 per monfi I 300 per montl t 400 per month
{ 600 per month
{ 800 per month I 1000 per month a 10,000 per rpfltl(iii) Restouronts
(o) With woshroom
(b) Without woshroom{ 50 per month/ top
{ 50 per month/ top t 50 per month/ top
{ 50 per month/ top(iv) Teo stoll/eoteries B. Privotehospitols/Nursinghomes C. Privote institutions/ colleges/
schools.
(i) Boording { 50 per month/top
(ii) Non-Boording D. (i) Shopping complex 150 per month/ top
(ii) Commerciol shops with occess 4 50 per to deportmentol woter supply month/ top
5. Government lnstitutions/offices < 25 per month / top
6. Stote/Centrol Government employees residing in Government Quorters
(i) OBTMIBT (Bochelor BonocUQtr)
(ai) Type-l Quoner { 50 per month
(iii) Type-llQuorter 4 75 per month
(iv) Type-lll Quorter I I00 per month
(v) Type-lv Quorter < 125 per month
(vi) Type-V Quorter < 150 per month
(vii) Type-Vl Quorter/Bungolows { 175 per month
7. For bulk consumers (exomples,
Rojbhowon, CM Bungolow,
Secretoriot)I 3
8. For Privote sources such os Dug wells, Bore wells, Spring etc.
(i) One time regiskotion fee
(ii) Renewol fee
9. Public stond post
10. Bulk woter supplied through woter hydront IL Woter supply through tonkers
12. Religious institution with occess to deportmentol woter supply i.e Church/ Temple/ Gurudworo/
Mosque, etc.
I3. Bulk woter supply for Notionol/Stote level functions (Govt./Semi-govt./
NGO/Public/Privote
14. Bulk woter supply for community level functions
15. Chorges for use of deportmentol woter supply for conskuction purpose (Govt./Semi-Govt./ NGO
/Public/Privote)
16. Provision for bulk woter supply chorge of oll Govt./ Semi-Government construclion to be remitted to Government{ 1000
I 200 onnuolly
{ 20 per house hold As per detoil onolysis bosed on prevoiling rote to be opproved by the competent outhority
-doExempted from ony woter chorge
{ 2000 per doy I 1000 per doy As per detoil onolysis ond ossessment mode by the competent outhority As per detoil onolysis ond ossessment mode by the competent outhority.
(ii) Rotes of woter chorges where woter meters ore instolled :The woter supply services sholl be rotionolized with introduction of volumetric toriff thot will reploce the top bosed toriff system, wherever possible in the urbon ond semi-urbon towns. The rotes of metered toriff per kilolitres ( I 000 litres)
will be os follows :-I

sl.
NoCotegory
. Domestic
(i) Urbon Areos
(ii) Semi Urbon/ Administrotive HQs
2. Commerciol
3. Bulk supply through Tonkersflrucks
4. lndustriolrequirement{l5perKL
{SperKL t 30 per KL
( 175 per KL t 2001cer KL Explonotion:
u)
(ii)(o) 'Domestic"in section 5 meons ond includesAll residentiol complexes including tenont complexes;
(b)All Stote ond Centrol Government offices, institutions,
residentiol quorters ond oll educotionol institutions;
tommerciol" in section 5 meons lodges, restouronts,
hotels, confectionories/sweet shops, privote institutions like schools ond colleges, guest houses, clubs, theotres,
cinemo holls, swimming pools, fountoins, woshing ploces for vehicles, shops, goroges, petrol pumps, foctories,
bonks, nursing homes ond componies.
(2) Assessment ol woter chorges in cose ol und)tho zed use.(i) lf on inspection of ony ploce or premises or woter meters or ony other devices, or ony record mointoined by ony person, the outhorized officer of the deportmentfinds thot ony consumer is indulging in unouthorized use of woter,
he sholl, notwithstonding ony criminol proceedings thot moy be token ogoinst the consumer under ony other low for the time being in force, provisionolly ossess, to the best of his judgment, the woter chorges poyoble on occount of such unouthorized use of woter.
(ii) The order or provisionol ossessment sholl be served to the consumer in such monner, os moy be provided by regulotions.
(iii) The consumer to whom o notice hos been served under sub-clouse (ii) sholl be entitled to file obiection, if ony,
ogoinstthe provisionol ossessmentbe{orethe outhorizedMeter Toriff

officer of the deportment who moy, ofter offording o reosonoble opportunity of heoring to such consumer, poss o finol order of ossessment of the woter chorges poyoble by such consumer.
(iv) Any consumer served with the order of provisionol ossessment moy occept such ossessment ond deposit the ossessed omount with the officer designoted for the purpose within seven doys of service of such provisionol ossessment order upon him.
(v) lf the ossessing officer finds thot unouthorized use .{ wotei'
hos token ploce, it sholl be presumed thot the unouthorized use hos been continuing since the dote of storting of the construction, in cose the unouthorized use is for construction purpose or from the dote which the ossessing officerfinds thotthe unouthorized use hos been continuing in cose the unouthorized use is for other purposes.
(vi) The ossessment sholl be bosed on the plinth oreo of the building, in cose of unouthorized use for construction purpose or bosed on the number of inhobitonts, in cose of domestic purpose or bosed on the proboble quontiry in cose of other purposes.
(vii) The woter chorges under this section sholl be ossessed in occordonce with provisions in thisActond Rules mode thereunder.
6. Power to revise the rotes of woter toriff : The Government moy, lrom time to time, by notificotion, fix the rote or rotes of chorge on meter bosis or on the bosis of number of tops instolled or number of dwelling units or on the dimension of the service pipe, poyoble by the consumer for supply of woter under this Act ond different rote or rotes moy be fixed lor different oreos ond for different consumers;
Provided thot the rote of chorges for supply of woter for purposes other thon domestic purposes sholl not be less thon double the rotes chorged in respect of woter supplied for domestic purposes os moy be prescribed.
7. Exemption of woter chorges ond others : The Stote Government sholl olso hove the power to exempt ony institution, or Government body or orgonizotion from poyment of ony Toriff, fees or chorges for hoving woter supply connection ond consumption thereof os deemed fit.

8. Arronging pipes ocross rood, street,.
(l) The Government or the competent outhority sholl loyor corryony pipesforthe purposes of orronging or mointoining supply of woter, through, ocross, under or over ony rood or street or o ploce loid out or intended to be loid out os o rood or street or ony other ploce under the control of o locol outhority or ony person ond moy ot oll times do oll octs ond things which moy be necessory or expedient for repoiring or mointoining such pipes in on effective stote.
Provided thot.
(o) such work sholl be corried out with leost onnoyonce to the public ond within o reosonoble time;
(b) reosonoble compensotion os moy be determined by the Government sholl be poid to the owner or the locolouthority os the cose moy be, lor ony domoges sustoined by him or it ond directly occosioned by the corrying out of such operotions;
(c) the competent outhority sholl couse, not less thon seven doys notice in writing to be given to the owner or the locol outhority os the cose moy be, before commencing ony operotion under this section except in coses where immediote oction is considered necessory in which cose, the competent outhority moy by order ondior reosons to be recorded in writing,
dispense with the notice.
(2) The pipes, which cross the roods/streets, sholl be loid ot leost I (one) feet (30cm) below the rood so os to ovoid leokoges due to impoct of wheels.
(3) Disciplinory octions os per relevont rules, sholl be initioted ogoinst the defoulting fitters/ plumbers/Junior Engineers who foil to comply with sub- seaion (2).
9. Service line lo unouthorized occuponts:(l) When o request of on opplicont for gront of woter supply to his/her premises, tempororily occupied unouthorizedly,
is received in writing, the Executive Engineer mqy occept the proposol ond the person so opplying sholl, ot his/her own cost, provide oll service pipe ond fiftings Ior corrying out the works, or else he/she sholl deposit the money to the concerned Executive Engineer os per the opproved estimote, under this Act.

(2) Such woter supply connection to the unouthorized occuponts sholl not be treoted os the bosis Ior cloim for ollotment of lond ond or compensotion in the event of eviction/demolition in occordonce with due process of low in Urbon or Semi-urbon oreos.
10. Levy of woter tox on rurol consumers:(1) The rurol consumers who settle neor or within periphery of urbon ond Semi-urbon towns but hos woter supplyfrom the pipelines of urbon ond Semi-urbon oreos sholl poy the woter chorges under the provisions o{ this Act.
Similorly, the consumers who settle within Urbon/semiurbon towns ond get woter from rurol woter supply pipe lines sholl olso poy the woter chorges on equol footing.
(2) The consumers who ore settled in rurol oreos, villoges but get the woter supply from rurol woter supply pipe in his/her Reinlorced Concrete Cement, Semi-Reinforced Concrete Cement ond Semi Permonent Type buildings upto kitchen, bothroom, wosh bosin, sholl poy the woter chorge ot holf the opproved rotes fixed under the Ad for Urbon oreos.
Chopter - tll Oflences ond Penolties
11. Prohibition ond Prevention of Wostoge of Woter :(l) No owner or occupier of ony lond or building to which woter is supplied by the deportment sholl either willfully or negligently or otherwise suffer such woter to be wosted or sholl suffer pipe, tops, works ond fittings for the supply of woter to remoin without repoir so os to couse wostoge of woter.
(2) No person sholl couse wostoge of woter or misuse of public stond post, hydronts pipe, etc.
(3) Wherever the Executive Engineer hos reoson to believe thot os o result of ony defect in pipes, tops or fittings connected with woter supply, the woter supply to the lond or building is being wosted, he moy by o written notice,
require the owner or the occupont of the lond or building within such period, os moy be specified in the notice to repoir ond moke good the defect.

(4) lf the repoirs ore not effected within the time speciried in the soid notice os in sub-section (3) of this section, the Executive Engineer moy couse such repoirs to be conied out ond recover the cost of repoir from the owner or occupont of the lond or buildings os the cose moy be os on orreor of woter chorge.
(5) The owner or occupont of ony lond or building or on which the woter supplied by the deportment, under this Act, is wosted for poor condition of pipes, moin or other works he/she sholl give notice of the some to the competent outhority lorthwith.
12. Misuse ond cousing domoge to woter works, volves ond hydronts:(l) (o) No person sholl domoge or couse domoge to woter reservoir moin, pipes or other opplionces, for supply of woter under the monogement of the deportment.
(b) No person sholl drow off or divert ony woter from woter reservoir, moin, pipes or hydront under the monogement ond control of the deportment.
(c) No person other thon the outhorized stoff or licensed plumber or fitter, sholl open or keep open the volves or ony woter works of the deportment meont for the supply of woter to the public.
(d) No person sholl couse or sufler to percolote or droin into or upon ony woter works whereby the woter therein moy, in ony woy, be fouled, polluted or its quolity ond quontity oltered;
(e) No person sholl couse or ollow to enter ony onimol into such woter works;
(0 No person sholl bothe or wosh clothes in such woter works, notified woter sources;
(g) No person sholl throw or put onything into or upon the woter in such woter works.
(2) Whoever controvenes sub.section (l) shollbe punishoble with fine which moy exlend to t 50,000 (Rupees iifty thousond) only.

'13. Other Offences ond penolties:Punishment for toping or moking illegol connection or other illegol octivities :- Whoever, being o consumer or otherwise, with on intention to get unlowfulgoin, connects service lines without proper permission from the competent outhority,
domoges or tompers o woter meter, or uses ony device or method which interferes with the occurocy ond proper metering of the woter supply, sholl be punishoble ( l ) ln cose of o domestic consumer, on first conviction with fine which moy extend to ten thousond rupees,
ond in the event of o second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment for o term not exceeding six months ond with fine which moy extend to twentyfive thousond rupees.
(2) ln cose of non domestic consumer, on first conviction with fine which moy extend to i?fteen ihousond rupees ond in the eventof o second or subsequent conviction imprisonment for o term not exceeding two yeors ond with line which moy extend to fifty thousond rupees.
14. Offences reloting lo theft of moteriol :(l ) Whoever, dishonestly:(o) Cuts or removes or tokes owoy or tronsfers ony moteriol or meter from ony instollotion or ony other ploce, or site where it moy be rightfully or lowfully stored, deposited, kept, stocked, situoted or locoted including during tronsportotion, without the consent of the concerned deportment or the owner or the licensee, os the cose moy be, whether or not the oct is done for profit or goin ; or
(b) Stores, possesses or otherwise keeps in his premises, custody or control, ony moteriol or meter without the consent of its owner, whether or not the oct is done for prolit or goin; or
(c) Loods, corries or moves {rom one ploce to onother ony moteriol or meter without the consent of its owner, whether or not the oct is done for profit or goin; or
(d) Obstructs or couses to obstruct personolly or in connivonce with ony other person topping of ony woter source, sholl be guilty of on offence ond sholl
4t be lioble on conviction, to imprisonment for o term which moy extend to three yeors but sholl not be less thon three months, or fine which moy extend to rupees twenty thousond but sholl not be less thon rupees five thousond or with both.
(2) lf o person, hoving been olreody convicted of on offence punishoble under sub- section (l) is found guilty of on offence under the soid sub- section, sholl be punishoble for the second or subsequent offence for o term of imprisonment which sholl not be less thon six months but which moy extend to three yeors ond sholl olso be lioble to fine which sholl not be less thon rupees ten thousond which moy extend to thirty thousond.
15. Punishment lor receiving stolen C:overnment Woter Supply property: Whoever, dishonestly, receives ony stolen Government Woter Supply moteriol knowingly or hoving reosons to believe the some to be stolen property, sholl be lioble, on conviction to the punishment of imprisonment o{ either description for o term which moy extend to three yeors, or fine which moy extend to rupees ten thousond or with both.
Chopter - lV Powers of competent outhority ond resolution of disputes.
16. Power of Executive Engineer to cut off or turn off supply of Woter:-Notwithstonding onyhing contoined in this Act, the Executive Engineer moy cut off the connection of onywoterworks ofthe deportment to ony lond or building to which woter is supplied or moy turn off such supply for ony of the following coses:(i) lf the lond or building is unoccupied, or
(ii) lf ofter receipt of written notice from the Executive Engineer requiring him to refroin from so doing the owneroroccupont ofthe lond or building continues to use the woter or permits the some to be used in controvention of this Act or ony rules mode thereunder, or
(iii) lf the owner or occupont of ony lond or building to which woter supply is mode by the deportment refuses to odmit ony officer or employee ofthe deportmentduly outhorized for the purpose of moking ony inspection or repoiring reloting to woter supply or prevent such officer or employee from moking such inspection or repoir, or,

(iv) lf the owner or occupont of the lond or building willtully or negligently iniures or couses domoges to ony pipe or ony fittings, volves etc. conveying woter of the deportment, or
(v) lf ony pipe works or fitting conneaed with supply of woter to the lond or building is found on exominotion, out of order to such on extent os to couse wostoge of woter ond immediote prevention is necessory or
(vi) lf by reoson of leokoge in the service pipe or fitting, domoge is coused to o public slreet or ony public or privote property ond immediote prevention is necessory or
(vii) lf there is ony woter pipe situoted within the lond or building to which no top or other efficient meons of turning the woter off is ottoched cousing wostoge of woter, or
(viii) lf due to ony reoson it is seen thot the pipeline is being contominoted, or
(ix) lf ony fee, rentol, cost of woter or ony chorge or other sum due under this Act, is not poid by the consumer within the period of fifteen doys ofter receipt of o bill for the some.
I 7. Disputes between the Deportment ond Consumer:(l) The Superintending Engineer or such other officer not below the ronk of Executive Engineer or such other officer speciolly empowered, sholl hove the power to decide oll disputes reloting to the liobility for the poyment of toriff,
fees ond other chorges or exemption therefrom.
Provided thot notwithstonding onything contoined in the oforesoid provisions, ony person oggrieved by the finol order possed under sub-section (2) of section 5 ond other relevont sections of the Act, moy, within thirty doys of the soid order, prefer on oppeol to the Superintending Engineer hoving jurisdiction over the oreo.
(21 No oppeol under sub-section (l) sholl be entertoined unless on omount equol to one third of the ossessed omount is deposited within the period prescribed lor the purPose.
(3) The oppellote outhority relened to in sub-sedion (l ) sholl dispose of the oppeol within thirty doys of presentotion of oppeol ofter heoring the porties.

(4) The orders of the oppellote outhority possed under subsection (3) obove sholl be finol.
18. Advonce notice for stopping woter supply :- lf ot ony time,
supply of woter is proposed to be stopped for more thon twenty four hours in ony locol oreo or to ony premises, the competent outhority moy give orol or written notice before twenty four hours in odvonce,
inform the locol outhority, inhobitonts of such locol oreo or the owner of such premises os the cose moy be.
19. lnspection of premises :(1) Any officer not below the ronk of Junior Engineer outhorized in this beholf by the competent outhority moy,
between 9 om ond 5 pm, enter into ony premises for the purpose oi inspecting ony woter instollotion.
(2) The power conferred by this section includes power to breok open the door/gote where the Executive Engineer or such Gozetted Oflicer hos o reoson to believe thot woter is being misused or used without proper permission.
Provided thot the power to breok open the door/gote sholl be exercised only ofter the owner or ony other person in occupotion of the premises, if he is present therein, refuses to open the door/gote on being colled to do so.
(3) lf such officer is, ot ony such time, refused odmission into such premises for the purpose ond prevented from moking such inspection, the competent outhority moy,
ofter giving the consumer on opportunity oi being heord,
cutoff the supply of woter to thot premises;
Provided thot if ony such premises is on oportment in the octuol occuponcy of o womon who, occording to the custom does not oppeor in public, such officer sholl,
before entering such oportment, give notice to such womon thot she is ot liberty to withdrow ond offord her every reosonoble locility for withdrowing ond moy then enter the oportment.

Chopter - V Notificotion of woter sources ond protection of woter supply moins ond their ownership
20. Notified woter sources ond woter moin routes :(1) The Government moy, from time to time, identify ond declore certoin woter sheds or woter sources or both or woter moin routes os notified wotersheds or woter sources or notified woter moin routes;
(2) Such notified wotersheds or woter sources or notified woter moin routes sholl, thereupon be under the odministrotive control of Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment, Government of Arunochol Prodesh;
(3) Any use of such notified wotersheds or woter sources or woter moin routes by the public, locol outhority or ony other ogency sholl require prior opprovol ofthe competent outhority;
(4) The Government moy impose tox for use of woter from the notified woter sheds, woler sources or woter moin routes by the public, locol outhority or ony other ogency ond the chorges sholl be not less thon seventy percent of the chorges for supply of woter for domestic purposes,
os moy be prescribed;
(5) Privote Woter sources such os springs, dug wells, Bore wells etc. sholl mondotorily be verified by the officiols of Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment to certify its reliobility in terms of quolity ond o nominol, surchorge sholl be levied from the consumer.
Explonotion:
(i) 'Wotershed" meons on oreo surrounding ony spring,
streom or pond (whether formed noturolly or otherwise)' which conserves ond sustoins o source of woter, the quontity whereof is likely to be voried by erosion of soil,
felling of trees or disturbonces by coftle grozing or humon settlement/octivity ond includes the gothering ground of o river system;

(ii) 'Woter route" meons the strip of lond olong which the pipeline for supply of woter is loid ond includes the lond odjoining such pipeline which, if disturbed by quorrying,
digging, or movement of vehicles etc. is likely to disturb the stobility of the pipeline.
(iii) "Woter source" meons ony spring, streom, river, pond
(whether formed noturolly or otherwise) from where woter is topped {or domestic or other purposes.
21. Ownership ol Assets creoted:(l) The ownership of the ossets creoted by Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment like heodworks, sedimentotion tonks, filtrotion tonks, storoge tonks, distribution tonks, overheod tonks, pumps, motors,
ring well, lift woter supply system, the moin ond service lines, woter meter, woter tops etc. in Urbon, Semi-urbon ond rurol oreos sholl vest with the Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment till these ore honded over to the consumers, locol bodies, Non Government Orgonizotion, Ponchoyots or Villoge Woter Sonitotion Commiftee etc.
(2) The ownership of service line in the cose of privote consumers sholl olso vest with Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment even though the cost of ony connection or port thereof hos been borne by the opplicont.
(3) The field officers of the Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment sholl be outhorized to toke over old pipelines whenever new pipelines ore loid in lieu of old pipes ond they moy shift ond use these old pipes to ony other locotions os deemed fit.
(4) ln the event of such shifting ond re-use of old pipes under section 21, the deportment sholl mointoin proper records like Moteriol Account ot Site.
(5) The ownership of woter supply ossets creoted under different progrommes by other deportments olso sholl be vested in Public Heolth Engineering & Woter Supply Deportment.

22. Prohibition of construction of buildings etc. over lond,
pipes etc.:(l) The Government/villoge outhorities sholl provide, lree of cost, ot leost one ('l m) meter wide lond on both sides ol roods, steets, povements etc in Urbon, Semi-urbon ond rurol oreo for loying of pipelines by the Public Heolth Engineering &Woter Supply Deportment.
(2) No person sholl without permission of the competent outhority construct ony privote street, building, woll, fence or other structure over ony lond or pipes or moins belonging to the deportment.
(3) lf ony privote street is constructed or ony building, woll,
fence or other structure is erected on ony lond or pipes or moins belonging to the deportment, the competent outhority moy remove or couse to remove the some os moy be provided in thisAct, or ony other low for the time being in force.
(4) The expenses incurred by the competent outhority in so doing sholl be poid by the owner ofthe privote street or of the building, fence, woll or other structure or os the cose moy be, by the person controvening the Act ond sholl be recoveroble os orreors of lond revenue.
Chopter - Vl Miscelloneous
23. Compensotion for lond ond woter:(l) No compensotion for the lond used lor construction of Reinforced Concrete Cement structures like heodworks,
sedimentotion, storoge tonks etc ot privote londs sholl be poid by the deportment excepts the volue of ossets stonding or creoted on it.
(2) No cloim for compensotion sholl be poid in lieu of woter sources which ore being used for topping woter by the deportment for public use.

24. Non-liobility of the Deportment to poy penolty or domoges :The deportment sholl not be lioble in ony woy for ony loss or domoge or sufferings coused to ony person by the cutting off of the supply of woter due to drought or occidents or works reloting to re-loying or repoiring of ony woter works or other unovoidoble couses.
25. Obligotions ond Responsibilities of Consumers :(l ) Consume/s supply line from the moins ond volves therein sholl be mointoined by the Public Heolth Engineering ond Woter Supply Deportment ot the expense of owner, who sholl olso be responsible for breokoges, domoges or theft o{ the some.
(2) The consumers sholl not give ony type of sub-connection from his supply line.
(3) All consumers before vocoting their respective premises sholl report to the deportment of such move ond cleor their orreors, if ony, ond they sholl obtoin cleoronce certificotes from the Executive Engineers concerned for further reconnection in other locotions.
(4) All the consumers sholl ensure orrongement of proper roin woter horvesting structure olong with storoge sump of odequote quontity to store woter for use during breok down of normol woter supply of the deportment due to unforeseen noturol colomities.
26. Cognizonce of Offence :(l ) No court sholl toke cognizonce of ony offence punishoble under this Act except on comploint filed by on officer mentioned in sub-section (7) of section 3 oI this Act.
(2) No court interior to thot of J udiciolMogistrote offirst closs sholl try ony offence punishoble under this Act.
27. Limitotion of Prosecution : No court sholl toke cognizonce of ony offence punishoble under this Act unless comploint thereof is mode within two month from the dote on which the olleged commission oI offence come to the knowledge of Superintending Engineet Executive Engineer or ony such especiolly empowered officer hoving jurisdiction over lhe ploce of occurrence.

28. Protection of oction token in good foith : No suit,
prosecution or other legol proceedings sholl lie ogoinst ony officer or stoff of the Deportment for onything which is done in good foith or intended to be done under theAct or the rules mode thereunder.
29. Power to moke Rules:(l ) The Government moy, by notificotion, moke rules for oll or ony of the proyisions of the Act for implementofion of the Act.
(2) Every rule mode under this Act sholl be loid, os soon os moy be , before the Legislotive Assembly, while it is in session for o totol period of one month which moy be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, ond if the House ogrees in moking ony modificotion in the rule or the House ogrees thot the rule should not be mode, the rule sholl hove ef{ect only in such modified form or be of no effect, os lhe cose be,
however, thot ony such modificotion or onnulment sholl be without prejudice to the volidity of onything previously done under thot Rule.
30. Power to remove difficulties:lI ony difficulties orise in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Stote Government moy, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulties.
31. Repeol ond soving:(l) TheArunochol Prodesh Woter SupplyAct, 2000 (Act No.
of 2000) is here by repeoled.
(2) Notwithstonding such repeol onything done or ony oction token under the soid Act sholl be deemed to hove been done or token under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
No-49
FORM WS - |
See Sub secton 3(2) (lXo)
GOVERNMENT OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT AND WATER SUPPLY DIVISION Doted Woter suooly connection opolicotion form The Executive Engineer Public Heolth Engineering &
Woter Supply DivisionTo,
Photo Sir,
lMe request for your kind permission to ollow to drow woter {rom the Stote Government Moin(s).
lMe sholl be obide by the stonding rules, regulotion ond directives.
Yours foithfully,
(Signoture of the Applicont)
(To be filled in Copitol Letters)
Nome/ Designotion of the opplicont Correct moiling Address House No. with locotion Nome of the Deportment/Orgonisotion if in service _
Woter is required for (Tick Mork)
(o) Drinking /Construction/ Foctory use /lnstitution /
Commerciol/ Specify others uses _
(b) StoteGovernment/Privote/Centrol/Others
6. Detoils of premises (Tick Mork)
(o) RCC/Non RCC/ others
-(b) Nos o{ Storeys
-7. Period of woter supply requirement (Tick mork)
(o) Permonent / Temporory / Requirement for construction/
other usesI

8. User Detoils
(o) Nos. of Iomily unit
(b) Nos. of Users
(c) Nos. of Tops in the premises I . I / We hereby certify thot the obove informotion ore true ond ony subsequent chonges contemploted sholl be notified to the deportment fifteen doys prior to effecting such chonges.
2. I Me hereby fully ogree thot oport from other reosons prescribed in the Arunochol Prodesh woter supply Act
5. Woter supply connection moy be disconnected in the event Uwe violote ony rules or regulotion or foil to poy woter revenue.
3. I / we hereby declore thot I / we om / ore the owners / of the premises mentioned in the opplicotion ond entire liobility of poyment ofwoter chorges, dues ond fines sholl rest on me/us or on the person whomsoever/ the ownership / liobility if legolly tronsferred.
Signoture:
Applicont:
Heod of Deportment / Officer
(in cose ol Government Agency)
R OFFICE USE ONLY
(o) t l0 poid vide
(sum to be deposited under the occount of heod' O2l 5'lvoter supply).
(b) Woter supply connection Register Ref No. _
Bill Clerk PHE & WS Division
5r FORM WS -[
See Sub-seaion 3(2) (ll) (o)
GOVERNMENT OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING DEPARTMENTAND WATER SUPPLY DIVISION Woter supply connection Doto sheet :
l. Nome of consumer
2. Address
3. Woter connection register ref. No
4. Recommendotions:
(c) Size of supply pipe : _
(d) Lenqth
(e) Estimoted requirement per doy
(fl Heod ovoiloble from connection point
(g) Size ond LD of Stote Moin
(h) Dischorge ovoiloble in Stote moin
5. Connedion Chorges:
(A) Term deposit Receipt to be drown in fovour of Executive Engineer, Public Heolth Engineering Deportment.
(i) Supply of moteriols {
(ii) Lobour chorge T
(iii) Restorotion Supervision chorges T
(iv) Security Deposit / Cost of Meter { _
(v) Other chorges ( to be specified) t Sub Totol (A) {
(Rupees only
(B) Chorges to be credited under heod -'O21 5"woter supply
(i) Connection chorges {
(ii) Other chorqes < _
SUB-TOTAL (A+B){ _

(C) MONTHLY REVENUE ASSESMENT (os per woter supply Rule)
t
- (Rupees only N.B. if ossessment is done on the bosis of other foctors, seporote onolysis sheet should be ottoched.
6. Annuol mointenonce (if opplicoble)
{ (Rupees only.
7. Liobility of poyment of woter chorges owner / occupont ol premises :Nome
{ _ (Rupees) only.
9. Connection tobe corried out by the Deportment Junior Engineer Assistont Engineer Executive EngineerAddress _
8. System : Meter system / Top System _
Annuol woter tox ossessment (if opplicoble)

FORM WS - III See sub-Section 3(3)
GOVERT{MENT OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING DEPARTMENTAND I'VATER SUPPLY DIVISION To:
Subiect: Woter Supply Connection lntimotion Letter For Poyment Sir/Modom,
Wth reference to your opplicotion dotedon the obove subiect, you ore odvised to deposit the following sum in the Stote Bonk of lndio, bronch, under the heod (s) noted below ond produce the receipt (s) in the office of the undersigned for
{urther necessory oction:l Temporory Deposit Receipl drown in fovour of Executive Public Heolth Engineering Division
(A) (i) Supplyof moteriols {
(ii) Lobour Chorges l_
(iii) Restorotion/supervisionchorges{_
(iv) Security deposit {(v) other chorges 7
(Rupees
- ) only
2. Chorges to be credited under heod"02l5 Woter Supply"
(B) (i) connection chorge{
(ii) Other chorges (to be specified) z Sub Totol (A){
Grond totol (A+B) t
(Rupees- ) only

3. Pleose reod the detoil corefully:(o) Monthly ossessment (As per the Woter Supply rule)
t (Rupees
)only
(b) Annuol mointenonce cost (if opplicoble)
(Rupees T )only
(d) Systems: /Top system/
detoit<
(e) Annuol woter tox ossessment (if opplicoble)
(Rupees t ly
(0 Connection to be corried out by Deportment.
4. Other detoils
(o) size ofthe supply pipe:(b) Nos
(c) Length
(d) Heod ovoiloble from connection point:(e) size ond lD of Stote moi
(f) l.D of moin/distribution tonk;_
Yours foithfully
5. I hove reod the contents of this document. I fully ogree ond obide by the provision of the Arunochol Prodesh Woter Supply Act 201 5.
Signoture of Applicont(c) Liobility of poyment of woter chorges ond woter tox owner occupier of premises Executive Engineer PHE &Ws Division No55
(x) For officiol usc only:Received poyment of (Rupees only vide B.R ond TDR i,lo: doE for a Billing Clerk,PHE & WS Division
7. lmportont : Applicont pleose Sign this document ond returi to the deportment olong with Bonk Receipt ond Temporor_
Deposit Receipt os indicoted vide (l ) ond (2)
FORXT WS - tV See sub-Sedion 3(4)
GOVERNMENT OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING DEPARTMENTAND WATER SUPPLY DIVISION Doted Consumer lndex No:
Permission of Connection With reference to Registrotion No permission is hereby gronted to Shri/Smt. fo:
___in connection to his premises o{
locored ot_
The connection should be completed within one month's timo from the dote o{ issue of this connection permission, for which the Assistont Engineer Woter S chorgefloxes will be levied doy-montr- yeo Executive Engineer PHE & WS Division _56
upply should be contocted. Woter Copy to:0)
(2)
(3)
(4)Shri/S Superintending Engineer, PHE Circle Assistont Engineer PHE & WS Sub Division Junior Enqineer PHE & WS Section
-.FORM WS - V See sub-Section 4 (4)
GOVERNMENT OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING DEPARTMENTAND WATER SUPPLYDIVISIONNOTICE No Doted:To:
Mr/Mrs/Miss Subiect:Woter SuDolv Consumer index number Disconnection notice With reference to the obove consumer index number our occount shows on outstonding omount of t
(Rupees ) only lying ogoinst you on occount of woter chorge/toxes forthe period mentioned hereunder.
ln occordonce with Arunochol Prodesh Woter supplyAct. lt is necessory thot the woter chorges ond toxes ore required to be poid regulorly os

indicoted in the bills. Non poyment of the chorges etc, hos been viewed seriously by the Deportment ond you ore therefore directed to settle the outstonding dues immediotely within 15 doys from the dote of receipt of this notice. lf you foil to poy the dues within the time specified obove the Deportment sholl toke oction ogoinst you under the provisions of the Act.
Detoils:
Month yeor Executive Engineer PHE & WS DivisionI I
2.
3.