AN ACT to provide for the constitution of an Inland Water Transport
Regulatory Authority to promote the development of safe,
efficient, reliable and environmentally sound inland water
transport and terminal sendees for the benefit of ferry users,
freight consigners and water tourism, in the State of Assam.
Preamble Whereas it is expedient for the constitution of an Inland Water Transport Regulatory Authority to promote the
development of safe, efficient, reliable and environmentally sound
inland water transport and terminal services for the benefit of ferry
users, freight consigners and water tourism, in the State of Assam,
and for matters connected therewith or incidental there to ;
It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of
India, as follows CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY Companies Act, 2013;Short title, 1.
extent and
commencement.(1) This Act may be called the Assam Inland Water Transport
Regulatory Authority Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of Assam.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that the Government may notify' different dates for
different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a
reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Definitions 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,(0 “accident” means an unforeseeable and unexpected turn of events
that causes loss in value, injury, loss of life and increased
liabilities in relation to inland water transport;
(«) “Bank” means a nationalized or scheduled bank;
(Hi) “Regulatory Authority” means Assam Inland Water Transport
Regulatory Authority;
(iv) “cargo” includes anything carried or to be carried in the vessel;
(v) “cargo vessel” means a vessel which is not a passenger vessel;
(vi) “company” means a company as defined in section 3 of the Act 1 of
2013.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018 3775
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(Xi)
(xii)
(xiii)
(xiv)
(xv)
(xvi)
(xvii)
(xviii)“conservancy” means development of water front including
dredging, river training and management of fairway;
“consumer” means any person who pays a consideration for a
service provided to him by any passenger vessel or cargo vessel;
“court” means a civil, criminal and revenue court of the competent
jurisdiction;
“dock” means an area of water in a port that can be closed off and
that is used for putting goods onto and taking them off vessels or
repairing vessels;
“facilitation centre” means a one stop service centre for customers
and service providers who have to visit the Regulator}' Authority
or its sub-offices for certificates, permits or any other services
incidental thereto;
“ferry” means a vessel providing passenger transport services or
combined passenger and vehicular (Ro Ro) transport services
across or along a inland waterways within the State of Assam
irrespective of the operating agency;
“Indigenous design” means such vessel designs which has been
designed by the local communities in the State of Assam;
“manufacturing company” means any company which builds or
manufactures ferries, vessels or any part or equipment thereof;
“master” includes any person (except a pilot or harbour master)
having command or charge of a vessel;
“officer” including conservator means officer
designated/appointed by the Regulatory Authority to be the proper
officer at the port or place and in respect of the matter to which
reference is made in the provision of this Act in which the
expression occur;
“operator” means and includes any person or entity who operates,
controls, or supervises any vessel; port, terminal, vessel, building,
yard, freight Vessel, tourist cruise or any other industry' support
service providers or any independent contractor performing such
services or navigation and transportation in inland waters;
“owner” means,(i) in relation to a vessel, the person to whom the Vessel or a
share in the Vessel belongs;

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018
(xix)
(xx)
(xxi)
(xxii)
(xxiii)
(xxiv)
(xxv)
(xxvi)(ii) "passenger” means any person carried on a vessel except,(a) person employed or engaged in any capacity on board the
vessel on the business of the vessel;
(b) person on board the vessel either in pursuance of the
obligations laid upon the master to carry wrecked, distressed
or other persons or by reason of any circumstances which
neither the master nor the charterer, if any, could have
prevented or forestalled;
“ Passenger Vessel” means a Vessel with the registered capacity to
carry passengers:
“pollutant” means ‘environmental pollutant’ as defined in section
(b) of the Environmental Protection Act of 1986:
"pollution” means and includes,(a) such contamination of water or such alteration of the physical,
chemical or biological properties of water or such discharge
of any sewage or trade effluent or of any other liquid, gaseous
or solid substance into water (whether directly or indirectly)
as may or is likely to, create a nuisance or render such water
harmful or injurious to public health or safety, or to domestic,
commercial, industrial, agricultural or other legitimate uses,
or to the life and health of animals or plants or of aquatic
organisms;
(b) any solid, liquid or gaseous substance (including noise)
present in the atmosphere in such concentration as may be or
tend to be injurious to human beings or other living creatures
or plants or property or environment;
"port” means a place and shall be construed as understood within
the meaning of the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
“prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the State
Government or the regulations made by the Regulatory Authority,
as the case may be, under the relevant provisions under this Act;
“safety certificate” means, prescribed mandatory certificate issued
to a vessel by Regulator}' Authority or another competent
authority approved by the Regulatory Authority;
“State Government" means the Government of Assam;
“surveyor” means a person appointed by the Regulatory Authority
who inspects, surveys, examines, assesses, monitors and reports
the condition of any vessel, and cargo to the Regulatory
Authority;Central
Act 29 of
1986.
Central
Act 15 of
1908.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018 3777
(xxvii) “tariff’ means the schedule of rates for the services provided by
the operators and owners which in the case of ferry and passenger
services shall be determined by the State Government from time to
time;
(xxviii) “terminal” means an area, land, building'establishmcnt at a port
that is used by the passengers or cargoes leaving or arriving by
vessel;
(xxix) “vessel/ship” means an inland mechanically/electric/elcctronic
propelled vessel used for ferrying passengers or goods/cargo or
both;
(xxx) “wreck” includes the following when found in the waterways or
on the shores thereof:(a) goods which have been cast into the waterways and then sink
and remain under water;
(b) goods which have been cast or fallen into the waterway and
remain floating on the surface;
(c) goods which are sunk in the waterway, but are attached to a
floating object in order that they may be found again;
(d) goods which are thrown away or abandoned; and
(e) a vessel abandoned without hope or intention of recovery.
Establishment 3. (1)
of the Regulatory Authority.CHAPTER II THE ASSAM INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
REGULATORY AUTHORITY The State Government shall, bj notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Regulatory Authority under the name and
style “THE ASSAM INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
REGULATORY AUTHORITY”.
(2) The Regulatory Authority constituted under section (1). shall
exercise such powers as may be conferred on it. and discharge
such functions assigned to it under the Act and the rules made
there under.
Appointment of
Chairperson
and other
Members.4- (1) The Regulatory Authority shall consist of.(a) a ( ’hairperson to be appointed by the State Government from
amongst officers, serving or retired,not below the rank of
Commissioner & Secretary to the Government of Assam,
having experience in the field of public administration,
regulation, law enforcement and financial management.
(b) not less than two members and not more than four members to
be appointed by the State Government from amongst persons
of ability, integrity and standing, half of which will constitute

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018
Resignation and 5.
removal of
Chairperson
and Members.persons having experience in management and administration
of inland waterways, marine engineering, transport,
environmental science, environmental law, voluntary
organisations, maritime industry, economic development,
social welfare, etc and the other half having experience in law
and administration:
Provided that at least one Member of the Regulator}'
Authority shall be a woman having requisite qualification
under this clause.
(c) A Secretary to be nominated by the State Government from
amongst the officers of the civil service of the State holding a
post not below in rank than that of a Deputy Secretary or
equivalent.
(2) Till the chairperson and members of the Authority are appointed,
the senior most Secretary of the Transport Department.
Government of Assam shall perform the functions of the
Regulatory Authority.
(•) The Chairperson or any Member may, by notice in writing under their own hand addressed to the Governor of the State of Assam,
resign his office.
(») Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1) of section 4, the
State Government may, by order, remove the Chairperson or a
Member from his office if such Chairperson or Member,(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence; or
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment
outside the duties of his office; or
(d) is, in the opinion of the State Government, unfit to continue in
office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to
affect prejudicially his functioning; or
(f) is in any way, concerned or interested in any contract or
agreement made by or on behalf of the Regulatory Authority
or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any
benefit or emolument arising there-from otherwise than as a
member and in common with the other members of an
incorporated company, and is held guilty of misbehavior; or
(g) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court; or
(h) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which in the opinion of the Governor of the State of Assam
involved moral turpitude.
(iii) No person shall be removed under this section until that person
has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018 3779
Term of office
of the
Chairperson
and Members
of the
Regulatory
Authority.
Terms and
conditions of
service of the
Chairperson
and Members
of the
Regulatory
Authority.
Member to act
as Chairperson
or to discharge
his functions in
certain
circumstances.6. The Chairperson and Members shall hold office for such term as the Government may provide, but not exceeding five years:
Provided that no Chairperson or Member shall hold office
after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
Vacancies not
to invalidate the
proceedings of
the Regulatory
Authority.
Procedure to be
regulated.7. The salaries and allowances payable to. and the other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members shall be
such as may be prescribed by the State Government under the
rules:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the
other terms and conditions o f sen ice o f the Chairperson and
Members shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
8. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the
State Government may. by notification, authorize one of the
members to act as the Chairperson until the new Chairperson is
appointed to fill such vacancy.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing
to absence on leave or otherwise, the State Government may. by
notification, authorize one of the membets to act as the
Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes his
duties.
9. (1) Any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or a Member of the Regulatory Authority shall be filled by the State Government as
per provisions of rules framed under section 56 by notification in
the Official Gazette, as soon as may be, after the occurrence of the
vacancy, other than a casual or temporary vacancy.
(2) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and Members of the Regulatory Authority shall
be such as may be prescribed by the State Government under the
rules :
Provided that their salary, allowances and other terms and
conditions of service shall not be varied to their disadvantage after
appointment.
10. (1) The Regulatory Authority shall have the powers to make regulations to regulate its own procedure within the framework of
this Act.
(2) All orders and decisions of the Regulatory Authority shall be
authenticated by the Secretary or any other officer of the
Regulatory' Authority as may be duly authorized by the
Chairperson.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018
Officers and
staff of the
Regulatory
Authority.11. (1) The Regulator}’ Authority for the purpose of enabling it to
efficiently discharge its functions under this Act may create posts
of officers, employees, as it considers necessary with prior
approval of the State Government.
(2) The Regulatory Authority may obtain services of consultants,
advisors, lawyers, and agents as may be necessary to carry out the
functions of the Regulatory Authority by engaging them on
contract basis and provide for their remuneration consistent with
industry practices in India.
(3) The Chairperson, Members and officers of the Regulatory
Authority shall be deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.Act No
of 1860.
Offices of the 12. (1)
Regulatory Authority,The head office oflhe Regulatory Authority shall be at such place
as the State Government may determine by notification published
in the Official Gazette.
(2) The Regulatory Authority max, by notification in the Official
Gazatte and with prior approval of the State Government, establish
sub-offices and citizen facilitation centers at such other places, as
may be considered necessary.
(3) The Regulatory Authority shall have its sittings at the head office
or any other place and at such time as the Chairperson may direct,
and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of
business in its sittings as may be prescribed by the Regulator}
Authority Divisions of the 13. (1)
Regulatory AuthorityThe Regulatory' Authority shall have such number of Divisions or
Departments, to administer and enforce the provisions relating to
safety, environment, trade, and dispute resolution and for any
other activities or purposes as may be determined by the
Regulatory Authority.
(2) Each Division or Department shall be headed by an officer
appointed by the State Government, to be designated as the Head
of that Division or Department who shall function under the
superintendence, direction and control of the Chairperson of the
Regulatory Authority.
(3) The Regulator}- Authority may set up administrative divisions
required for its proper functioning, such as information
technology, administration, finance and any other, in the manner
as may be prescribed by rules made by the State Government.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018 3781
The Functions
of the
Regulatory
Authority.CHAPTER HI THE FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE REGULATORY
AUTHORITY
14. (1) The Regulator} Authority shall perform the following functions as
per the provisions of this Act and the Rules framed thereunder:(a) To regulate the activities of inland water transport operators;
(b) To regulate the activities of inland water port and terminal
service operators;
(c) To register vessels, operators, issue licenses, certificates,
permits, approvals, and maintain central data base as
prescribed.
(d) To ensure compliance with prescribed safety and
environmental regulations for ports, terminals, vessels,
navigation and other inland water transport activities;
(e) To protect the interest of the consumers under this Act:
(f) Frame regulations and detailed guidelines and issue executive
instructions for its proper functioning;
(g) To furnish the required reports;
(h) To enforce penalties;
(i) To perform any other related function as may be assigned to
it by the State Government from time to time.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained
under sub- section (1), the Regulatory Authority may,(a) perform all functions and duties required to be performed
under this Act including conservancy;
(b) approve and implement environmental, economic, safety
management and emergency plans;
(c) recommend to the State Government amendments to this Act;
(d) cooperate with Inland Waterways Authority of India and
work on cooperative work programmes al national and stale
level in consultation with Central and State Government;
(e) render advice to the State Government on matters relating lo
Inland Water Transport;
(f) encourage indigenous design and manufacture of vessels,
ferries, and their components by acting as catalytic agent;

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018
The Powers of
the Regulatory
Authority.(g) cause to establish a training institute for the capacity building
of inland waterways transport service provider, inland vessels
masters and crew, stakeholders, including its own and
DIWTA officers and employees;
(h) engage in scientific and applied research for efficient
implementation of this Act;
(i) carry' out analysis of inland water traffic data and prepare
annual reports on the overall inland waterways development
in the State of .Assam, make projections for inland waterways
traffic demand in Assam, and assist vessel/cargo/ferry
operators to draw up their expansion plans;
(j) promote multi modal transport system for benefit of
consumers and trade;
(k) promote public private partnerships, private participation and
outsourcing for effective implementation of this Act;
(l) take all necessary steps for, or may be incidental to the
exercise of any power or the discharge of any function
conferred or imposed on it by this Act;
(m) carry out any other function, duty and responsibility which
may be entrusted to it by the State Government; and
(n) lay down minimum standards of quality of service to be
provided by the inland water transport operators, ferry
service providers, inland water traffic service providers, and
monitor and enforce the set performance standards relating to
continuity, reliability and quality o f service.
15. (1) The Regulatory Authority may,(1) if and when considers it expedient so to do. may, by order in
writing, call upon any inland waterway service provider at any
time to furnish in writing information, including financial data, or
explanation relating to its functions as the Regulatory Authority
may require;
(ii) issue improvement or prohibitory notices to a vessel, port,
company, owner, terminal operator as the case may be;
(iii) make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any inland waterways
operator or service provider or may appoint any of its officers to
inspect the books of account or other document of any inland
waterways operator or service provider;
(iv) itself investigate or form a committee to independently investigate
any inland waterways related accidents;
(2) The State Government may in appropriate cases, if so wishes, by
order in writing, authorize the Ministry of Transport to have

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018 3783
general superintendence over the Regulatory Authority especially
for the purpose of policing waterways of Assam in the interest of
security, safety and prevention of pollution in such waterways.
The State 16.
Government
may empower (i)
the Regulatory
Authority:The State Government may empower the Regulatory Authority,-
to realise and regulate any or all of the passenger tariffs, tolls or
fees;
to realise and regulate any or all of the cargo tariffs, tolls and fees;
(iii) to regulate passenger and vessel route licensing and allocation;
(iv) to regulate passenger and vessel landings, terminal landings;
(v) to regulate fair competition amongst public and private players;
(vi) to oversight complaints through its dispute settlement department;
and
(vii) to address the disputes in public private partnership arrangements.
Regulatory
Authority to
have same
powers as
vested in a Civil
Court.17. The Regulatory Authority shall, while discharging its functions under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in
respect of the following matters, namely:—Central
Act 5 of
1908.
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and compel them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to produce the
documents or things;
(ii) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;
(i») receiving evidence on affidavit; and
(iv) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court
or office;
Transparency
and Good
Governance.18. The Regulatory Authority shall ensure good governance,
transparency and fairness while exercising its powers, functions
and duties as enshrined under this Act by engaging in due
consultations with all stakeholders and making all its decisions
fully documented and available for public information.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018
CHAPTER IV FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT, AND ANNUAL
REPORT Finances of the
Regulatory
Authority.19. (1) (a) There shall be a fund to be known as the “Regulatory' Authority
Fund” vested in the Regulatory Authority which shall be utilised
by the Regulatory Authority io meet all expenditure in connection
with their functions under this Act. Ihe Regulatory Authority
Fund shall be drawn from and comprise of,(i) Consolidated Fund of the State of Assam;
(ii) grants made by the Government;
(iii) loans obtained from the Government; and
(iv) revenues generated by the Regulatory Authority.
Bankers of the Regulatory
Authority.
Audit of
Accounts. -(b) The expenditure of the Regulatory Authority' shall be borne out of
the Consolidated Fund of the State of Assam, and through the
revenues generated by the Regulatory Authority itself.
(c) The Regulatory Authority shall prepare and submit its annual
budget along with utilization plans to the State Government tw'o
months before the expiry of the financial year for the following
financial year in such a manner as may be prescribed by the Slate
Government and the State Government shall dispose of the same
within two months of the receipt thereof.
(d) The Regulatory Authority shall prescribe and levy reasonable fees
and collect the same for the services rendered, documents issued,
licenses granted or information provided by it.
(e) '[’ he schedule of fees prescribed from time to time shall be
published, placed in the public domain, displayed prominently in
the offices of the Regulatory Authority and given wide publicity.
20. The Bankers of the Regulatory' Authority shall be any Scheduled
Commercial Bank as may be determined by the Regulatory
Authority.
21. (I) All accounts of receipts and expenditure of the Regulatory Authority shall be maintained in the manner prescribed by the
State Government.
(2) The Accounts of the Regulatory Authority shall be audited
annually by a Chartered Accountant duly appointed for the said
purpose by the Regulatory' Authority.
(3) The result of Audit shall be subject to the scrutiny of the
Accountant General of the State of Assam.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018
Annual Report Design
construction
and survey of
new vessels.
Safety of
existing vessels.
Design,
construction
and materials
of Vessels.
Registration of
all Vessels.
Knowledge and
skill of the
vessel
operators,3785
(4) The result of Audit shall be communicated by the Auditor to the
Regulatory Authority through the Member Secretary of the
Regulatory Authority, who shall submit a copy of the Audit
Report along with its observations to the State Government
through the Finance Department.
22. (1) The Regulatory Authority shall during each financial year prepare an Annual Report of the working of the Regulatory Authority and
all work undertaken during the year, together with Balance Sheet
and Audited Accounts, in such form and at such time as may be
prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities during
the previous financial year and an account of the activities likely
to be undertaken by it in current financial year. A draft of the
Annual Report along with the Audited Accounts of the Regulatory
Authority, and the Auditor’s Report thereon, shall be placed
before it in its Annual Meeting for approval and copies of such
report shall be forwarded to the State Government.
(2) The State Government shall cause every such report to be laid
before the State Legislature as soon as may be after the receipt of
the report under sub-section (1) of this section.
CHAPTER V SAFETY OF VESSELS
23. All new vessels shall be designed and constructed as per the
recognized standards of construction and survey rules for
certification, prescribed by the Regulatory Authority, from time to
time.
24. lite existing vessels shall ensure compliance with design, safety
and retrofitting nonns, as prescribed by the Regulatory Authority.
The Authority shall determine and enforce a phasing out plan for
all such vessels which do not meet the design, safety and
retrofitting norms.
25. 1 ’ he design, construction and materials of the hull structure as well
as machineries and equipment of the vessels shall be suitably
certified to ensure safe operations of Vessels for the intended
services. All reasonable efforts shall be made for making
passenger vessels differently-abled friendly.
26. All Vessels shall be registered with the Regulatory Authority and
have a unique registration number that shall be provided by the
Regulatory Authority. The Registration number shall be
prominently marked on Vessels.
27. The vessel operators, pilots and the ferry service providers shall
have the appropriate ability of professional knowledge and skill
for relevant operations to inland water environment, be familiar to
the procedures and requirements, pass corresponding professional

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018
pilots, ferry
service
providers.
Carrying
capacity of all
Vessels.
Rules and
regulations for
monitoring and
periodical
survey.
Out of water
inspection by
operators.training and hold valid competency certificates and conformity
certificates issued by the competent Authority lawfully authorized
in this behalf.
28. The carrying capacity of the Vessels shall be primarily determined
by the Regulatory Authority in terms of passengers and cargo as
prescribed.
29. The Regulatory Authority shall prescribe rules and regulations for
monitoring and periodical survey of ferries, and vessels from time
to time.
Safety briefing
to passengers.
Sufficient
lifesaving
equipment. Provision of life
jackets.
Provision of
First Aid Box.
Provision of fire
extinguisher.30. (1) The operators shall satisfy themselves about the integrity of the ferry’s and vessel’s hull by an out of water examination at least
every 3 years (2 years in case of wooden vessels) by the Surveyor
appointed under this Act or other technical persons appointed by
the Regulatory Authority and the same shall be properly-
documented on safely certificate prescribed by the Regulatory
Authority.
(2) The external components of steering and propulsion machinery and shell fittings shall also be examined out of the water. The
documented report of such examination shall be made available on
board for verification by the Regulatory Authority, passengers,
passengers associations and non- governmental organizations.
31. A safety briefing audio system shall be installed in all vessels to
give statutory safety briefing to passengers. The safety briefing
shall consist of restrictions about the movement on board,
emergency procedures, location of emergency exits, stowage and
use of personal protective equipment such as life jackets and other
life saving or support devices or appliances.
32. Every vessel shall have approved lifesaving equipment sufficient
for the number of persons as per safety certificate prescribed by
the Regulatory Authority.
33. Every vessel shali have life jackets to be provided to the
passengers in case of need. All the lifesaving or life support
devices and appliances shall be properly maintained and
periodically serviced based on the recommendations by the
manufacturing company.
34. First Aid Box shall be kept essentially in every vessel with all the
emergency first aid equipment and medications to be used in case
of emergency35. At least one multipurpose portable fire extinguisher of a
recognized standard shall be carried on each deck of all the vessels
navigating in inland waterways in addition to any other

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018 3787
List of
Prohibited items.
Prohibition on
smoking.
Navigation lights
on Vessels.
Emergency
communication
equipment.
General safety
measures.
Safety measures
for fuel storage
tanks.
- Appointment of
surveyor.
Independent
investigation into
pollution accident.
Accident
identification
report.equipment, appliance or device as may be prescribed by the
Regulatory Authority.
36. All the vessel operators shall prominently display posters on board
indicating items prohibited to be carried on the Vessels as may be
prescribed by the Regulatory Authority.
37. Smoking shall be strictly prohibited on the vessels, except in
identified smoking zones set up for the purpose.
38. The ferries, vessels operating at night should be equipped with
navigation lights as prescribed by the Regulatory Authority. The
sound signaling equipment shall also be provided on all vessels as
prescribed by the Regulatory Authority.
39. All vessels must carry prescribed emergency communication
equipment as prescribed by the Regulatory Authority.
40. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in
this chapter, the Regulatory' Authority may prescribe regulations
to enhance safety culture, mitigate dangers, identify risks, danger
of moving machinery parts, preventive measures for fire such as
fitting flame gauze, emergency power and charging of batteries,
approved maritime radio communication, and such other measures
that shall ensure structural strength, water tight integrity and
stability of vessels.
41. On mechanized Vessels, safety measures for fuel storage tanks
shall be such as prescribed by the Regulatory Authority.
42. The Regulatory Authority shall appoint such number of Surveyors
in order to cany on regular inspection and checking of ferries and
vessels so as to ensure compliance with all safety provisions of
this Act.
43. Independent investigation into Vessels causing pollution and
accident shall be ordered as prescribed by the Regulatory-
Authority.
44. (1) The investigators shall prepare an accident identification report within thirty days from the date of completion of the
investigation, and serve the same to parties concerned.
(2) The accident identification report shall specify the basic facts of
the accident, the causes of the accident, the responsibility for the
accident, lessons learnt and preventive action, if any.
(3) The Regulatory Authority shall publish findings of such
investigation report of safety accident and or pollution incident.
(4) T he Regulatory Authority shall have powers to grant exemption
and/or equivalence as prescribed, by the Regulatory Authority.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018
Prevention and
control of
pollution.
Survey for
compliance.
Entry in
surveyor
certificate.
Requirement to
carry
certificates.
Knowledge and
skill for the
prevention and
control of
pollution.
Readiness for
rescue plan.
Contingency
plan for
prevention and
control of
pollution.CHAPTER VI
PREVENTION OF POLLUTION
45. The structure, equipment and devices of a ferry or vessel in
respect of prevention and control of pollution shall be such as
prescribed by the Regulatory Authority. The Regulatory
Authority shall simultaneously provide for approved waste
disposal, reception facilities in its ports, terminals at reasonable
cost to the end user of inland water transport services.
46. The structure, equipment and devices of a ferry or vessel shall be
surveyed by a Surveyor that has been appointed by the Regulatory
Authority under this Act. Pollution prevention equipment .shall
be kept in good order and condition for emergency use.
47. An existing ferry or vessel may, upon survey by a Surveyor, may
be exempted from being equipped with otherwise prescribed
treatment facilities for pollutants and in that event specific
remarks shall be made on prescribed safety certificate.
48. A vessel shall, based on the requirements of the relevant laws,
administrative regulations, the provisions of the transport
department of Government of Assam, possess and carry on board
effective corresponding certificates and documents in respect of
the prevention and control of pollution caused by vessels and their
relevant operations to inland waters environment.
49. The vessel operator and the ferry service provider shall have the
appropriate ability of professional knowledge and skill for the
prevention and control of pollution caused by vessels and their
relevant operations to inland waters environment, be familiar with
the procedures and requirements for preventing the pollution
caused by vessels, pass corresponding professional training and
hold valid competency certificates and Conformity Certificates,
issued by the competent authority lawfully authorised in the
behalf.
50. The Regulatory Authority shall, in respect of die dangerous
characteristics of dangerous chemicals transported, formulate
contingency rescue plan for dangerous chemicals accidents for the
carrying vessels, and shall equip the carrying vessels with
sufficient and effective devices and equipment for emergency
rescue.
51. The operator of a port. dock, terminal, or a loading and unloading
place and relevant operating units shall have approved
contingency plan lor preventing and controlling of pollution
caused by vessels and their relevant operations to inland waters
environment and organize drills at least once a year, and maintain
proper records thereof.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018 3789
Abiding by
relevant
provisions and
standards for
prevention of
pollution.
Requirement for
third party
liability
insurance.52. Vessels navigating, berthing or operating within waters under
special protection shall abide by relevant provisions and standaids
for prevention of pollution in such waters.
Offences and
Penalties.53. For a vessel transporting dangerous chemicals by inland waters,
her owner or operator shall have prescribed third party liability­
insurance cover available as prescribed by the Regulatory-
Authority.
CHAPTER VII OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
54. (1) T he following shall constitute offences punishable under this Act:(a) Failure to comply w ith any order or direction of the Regulatory
Authority under this Act, and I or deliberate disobedience
thereof;
(b) Contravening or attempt to contravene or abetting the
contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rules made
thereunder;
(c) Obstructing any person acting under the orders or directions of
the Regulatory Authority from performing his functions and
exercising his powers under this Act;
(d) Damaging any works or property belonging to the Regulatory
Authority;
(e) Failing to furnish to any officer or employee of the Regulatory
Authority so authorized to receive, information required or
demanded from him for the purpose of this Act;
(f) Deliberately and willfully providing false and incorrect
information.
(2) (a)Any person who is found guilty of any offence under sub­
section (1) shall be punished with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees upon the first offence;
(b) In case of second and subsequent offence the fine may extend
to fifty thousand rupees, or imprisonment upto one year or both;
(c) In case of continuing contravention, an additional fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees for every day, shall be
imposed, during which the default continues.
(3) The following are offences of vessels that are punishable under the
Act in addition to penalty under any other law, for the time being
in force
(a)Discharging domestic sewage or oily water, etc. into inland
waters in excess of corresponding standards;

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018
Offences by
Companies.
Power to make
Rules.(b) Discharging waste gas produced from thejrunning of vessel's
power unit into the atmosphere in excess of corresponding
standards;
(c) Discharging residues of liquid toxic substances, or ballast
water, cleaning water or other mixtures containing such
substances, in inland waters;
(d) Using incinerator in inland waters;
(e) Using oil dispersant, which violates corresponding provisions.
(4) (a)Any person who is found guilty of any offence under sub­
section (3), shall be punished with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees upon the first offence.
(b) In case of second and subsequent offence, the fine may extend
to twenty-five thousand rupees, and imprisonment upto six months
or with both.
(c) In case of continuing contravention , an additional fine, which
may extend to one thousand rupees for every day, shall be
imposed, during which the default continues.
55. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of. and was responsible to the company
for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-scction shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge for that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of. any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation :- For the purpose of this section.(i) "Company" means anybody corporate, and includes a firm or
other association of individuals; and
(ii) "Director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
56. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018 3791
(2) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less than thirty days before the State Legislature, as soon as possible after
they are made and shall be subject to rescission by the State
Legislature or to such modification as the State Legislature may
make during the session in which they are so laid or the session
immediately following.
Any rescission or modification so made by the State Legislature
shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall thereupon take
effect.
Power to make 57.
Regulations.
Powers of 58.
Regulatory Authority to
delegate and issue
executive
instructions Tariff to be 59.
determined by the
State Government.(i) The Regulatory Authority shall with the previous approval of the
State Government and by notification in Official Gazette, make
regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this Act and the
rules framed thereunder for enabling it to discharge its functions
under this Act and the rules.
In particular and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such
(ii) regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely
(a) the time and the place at which the Regulatory Authority
shall meet and rules of procedure the Regulatory Authority
shall observe in regard to transaction of its business at its
meetings;
(b) the form in which an annual statement of accounts of the
Regulatory Authority shall be prepared under section 21;
(c) the form in which and the time at which an annual report of
the Regulatory Authority shall be prepared under section 22;
(d) any other matter which is, or may be. necessary to be
prescribed for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the
Regulatory Authority.
The Regulatory Authority may delegate such of its powers to its
Members and issue executive instruction not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, rules or regulations as may consider
necessary.
The State Government shall determine the tariffs for passenger
vessels or cargo vessels keeping in mind the market conditions,
operating cost levels, affordability of passengers in differential
manner as per the per capita income of the people across Assam.
Power to remove
difficulties.60. (a) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the State Government may, by order published in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act as appear to be necessary' or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
(b) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as it may be
after it is made, be laid before the State Legislature.

THE ASSAM GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, DECEMBER 10, 2018
Act to have effect
in addition to and
not in derogation
o f other Acts.61. (1) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to. and not in
derogation of, the provisions in any other law for the time being in
force, relating to inland waterways. forests, wildlife, disaster
management or environment protection.
(2) The functions of the Regulatory Authority are to be enabled by the Central Act
z\ct in conjunction with Inland Vessels Act, 1917, Indian Ports lo f1 9 1 7 - Central Art Act, 1908 and the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985. .7 No. 15 of
1908, Act
No. 82 of
1985.
S. M. BUZAR BARUAH,
Commissioner & Secretary to the Government of Assam,
Legislative Department, Dispur, Guwahati-6.
G uw ahatiPrinted and Published by the Dy. Director (P & S), Directorate of Printing & Stationery, Assam, Guwahati-21.
Ex. Gazette No. 1163 - 400 + 10- 10- 12-2018. (visit at-.dpns.assam.gov.in)