An Act to constitute a State Commission for Women and to provide for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the constitution of a
Commission with the aim of furthering the fundamental rights guaranteed by
Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution of India with respect to women and
to give effect to the Directive Principles of State Policy and in particular
those enshrined in Articles 38, 39, 39A and 42 of the Constitution to improve
the status and dignity of women in the society, to investigate into and take or
suggest suitable remedial measures against practices derogatory to women, to
effectively monitor and implement laws affecting women and to advise the
Govt. in all matters related to the improvement and upliftment of status and
dignity of women in the society and for matters connected herewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of Himachal Pradesh in the
Forty-Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be
called the Himachal Pradesh State Commission for Women Act, 1996.
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Himachal Pradesh.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Commission" means the Himachal Pradesh State
Commission for Women constituted under section 3 ;
(b) "Director General of Police" means the Director General of
Police, Himachal Pradesh State;

1. Passed in Hindi by the Himachal Pradesh Vidhan Sabha. For Statement of
Objects and Reasons see the Rajpatra, Himachal Pradesh (Extra-ordinary), dated
2nd December, 1996, pp. 5364 and 5373.
2. Passed in Hindi by the Himachal Pradesh Vidhan Sabha. For Statement of
Objects and Reasons see the Rajpatra, Himachal Pradesh, dated 9th June, 2008,
pp. 326 and 329.
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH STATE COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1996 3
(c) "Member" means a Member of the Commission and includes
the Chairperson and the Member-Secretary ;
(d) "National Commission for Women" means the National
Commission for Women constituted under section 3 of the
National Commission for Women Act, 1990 (20 of 1990) ;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act ;
and
(f) "Women" includes female-child or adolescent girl.
3. Constitution of Commission.- (1) The State Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the
Himachal Pradesh State Commission for Women to exercise the powers
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of-
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent woman committed to
the cause of women ;
(b) not more than four non-official members preferably women,
to be nominated by the State Government from amongst the
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have served the
cause of women or have had sufficient knowledge and
experience in law or legislation, administration of matters
concerning the advancement of women or leadership of any
trade union or voluntary organisation for women for
protection, upliftment and promotion of common interests of
women:
Provided that, at least one member each shall be from
amongst persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, respectively;
(c) the Commissioner-cum-Secretary (Welfare) and the Director
General of Police shall be the ex-officio members of the
Commission ;
(d) one Member-Secretary, to be appointed by the State
Government, shall be any officer, who is or has been a
member of the Civil Services of the State or of an All India
Service or holds a civil post under the State.
4. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and
Members .- [(1) The Chairperson and non-official members shall hold office
during the pleasure of State Government but not exceeding three years.]
(2) The Chairperson or a non-official member may, at any time, by
writing and addressed to the State Government, resign from the office of the
Chairperson or of the office of the member.

1. Sub-section (1) substituted vide Act No. 12 of 2008.
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH STATE COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1996
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the State
Government may remove a person from the office of the Chairperson or
member if, that person-
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent ;
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which, in the opinion of the State Government, involves
moral turpitude;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court ;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting ;
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission,
absent, from three consecutive meetings of the Commission,
or
(f) in the opinion of the State Government, has so abused the
position of the Chairperson or member as to render that
person's continuance in office detrimental to the public
interest or is otherwise unfit or unsuitable to continue as
such Chairperson or member :
Provided that, no person shall be removed under this clause until that
person has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(4) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) or (3) or in any other
manner, shall be filled in, as soon as may be, by a fresh nomination by the
State Government; and the person so nominated shall hold office for the
remainder of the term of office of the person in whose vacancy such person
has been nominated and would have held office, if the vacancy had not
occurred:
Provided that, if the vacancy of a member other than that of the
Chairperson occurs within six months preceding the date on which the term
of office of the member expires, the vacancy shall not be filled in.
(5) The salary, honorarium, if any, and allowances payable to, and the
other terms and conditions of holding the office of the Chairperson and the
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. Officers and other employees of Commission.- (1) The State
Government shall provide the Commission with such officers and employees
as, in the opinion of the State Government, may be necessary for the efficient
performance of the functions of the Commission under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the officers and other employees appointed for the
purpose of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. Salaries, honoraria and allowances to be paid out of Grants.-
The salaries, honoraria and allowances payable to the Chairperson and
members and the administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH STATE COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1996 5
pensions payable to the officers and other employees referred to in section 5,
shall be paid out of the grants referred to in section 16.
7. Vacancies etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.-
No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be
invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in
the constitution of the Commission or any defect in the nomination of a
person acting as the Chairperson or a member or any irregularity in the
procedure of the Commission, including issuing of notice for holding of a
meeting, not affecting merits of the matter.
8. Committees of Commission.- (1) The Commission may appoint
such Committees as may be necessary for the efficient performance, exercise
and discharge of its functions, powers and duties and also for dealing with
such special issues as may be taken up by the Commission, from time to
time.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to co-opt one or more
persons as it may think fit, on any committee appointed under sub-section
(1), and such person or persons, who are not members of the Commission,
shall have the right to attend the meetings of the committee and take part in
its proceedings, but shall not have the right to vote.
(3) The person so co-opted shall be entitled to receive such
allowances towards expenses for attending the meetings and any other task
of the Committee, as may be prescribed.
(4) The Commission may invite, any representative of the National
Commission for Women to any of its meetings, or may associate with itself,
in such manner and for such purposes as it may deem necessary, any person
whose assistance or advice it may need in complying with any of the
provisions of this Act or in carrying out any of its functions under this Act;
and a person so invited or associated shall have the right to take part in the
discussions of the Commission relevant to the purposes for which such
representative or person has been invited or associated, but shall not have the
right to vote.
9. Procedure to be regulated by Commission.- (1) The Commission
or a committee thereof shall meet as and when necessary and shall meet at
such time and place, as the Chairperson may deem fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the
procedure of the committees thereof.
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated
by the Member-Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly
authorised by the Member- Secretary in this behalf.
10. Functions of Commission.- (1) The Commission shall perform
all or any of following functions, namely :-
(a) investigate and examine all matters relating to the safeguards
provided for women under the Constitution and other laws ;
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH STATE COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1996
(b) present to the State Government, annually and at such other
times, as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the
working of those safeguards ;
(c) make in such reports recommendations for the effective
implementation of those safeguards for improving the
condition of women by the State;
(d) review, from time to time, the existing provisions of the
Constitution and other laws affecting women and recommend
amendments thereto so as to suggest remedial legislative
measures to meet any lacunae, inadequacies or shortcomings
in such legislations ;
(e) take up the cases of violation of the provisions of the
Constitution and of other laws relating to women with the
State Government or appropriate authorities ;
(f) entertain complaints and take suo-moto notice of matters
relating to,-
(i) deprivation of women's rights ;
(ii) non-implementation of laws enacted to provide
protection to women and also to achieve the objective
of equality and development ;
(iii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines or
instructions aimed at mitigating hardships and ensuring
welfare and development and providing relief to
women, and to take up the issues arising out of such
matters with the State Government or appropriate
authorities ;
(g) render guidance and advice to needy women in instituting
proceedings in any judicial forum or tribunal for violation of
constitutional provisions or any other laws relating to women;
(h) call for special studies or investigations into specific
problems or situations arising out of discrimination and
atrocities against women and identify the constraints so as to
recommend strategies for their removal ;
(i) undertake promotional and educational research so as to
suggest ways of ensuring due representation of women in all
spheres and identify factors responsible for impeding their
advancement, such as, lack of access to housing and basic
services, inadequate support services and technologies for
reducing drudgery and occupational health hazards ;
(j) participate and advice on the planning process of
socio-economic development of women ;
(k) evaluate the progress of the development of women in the
State;
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH STATE COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1996 7
(l) inspect or cause to be inspected a jail, remand home, women's
institution or other places of custody where women are kept
as prisoners or otherwise, and take up with the concerned
authorities such matters for remedial action as found
necessary ;
(m) fund litigation including police complaints involving issues
affecting a large body of women or the interpretation of any
provision of the Constitution or any other laws affecting
women, and present to the State Government, every six
months, report relating to such matters ;
(n) make periodical reports to the State Government or any
matter pertaining to women and, in particular, various
difficulties under which women toil ;
(o) co-operate with and assist and seek co-operation and
assistance of the National Commission for Women and other
Commissions for Women set up by different State
Governments and also the Commission for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes and the Minorities Commission ;
(p) frame schemes for the consideration of the State Government
or any other appropriate authority for more effective
implementation of this Act and, in particular, frame schemes
for more effective implementation of laws relating to payment
of maintenance to deserted women, payment of minimum
wages, ensuring equal pay for equal work, housing and
shelter for women, prevention of domestic violance,
prevention of sexual harassment at work, prevention of illegal
traffic in women, improvement of the health and safety in
women and legal aid for women ; and
(q) any other matter which may be referred to it by the State
Government or by the National Commission for Women.
(2) The State Commission shall, while investigating any matter
referred to in clause (a) or sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (f) of sub-section
(1), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit, and in particular, in
respect of the following matters, namely :-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
any part in the State and examining him on oath ;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document ;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits ;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
court or office ;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
documents ; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH STATE COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1996
(3)(a) On any investigation mentioned in clause (a) or sub-clauses (i)
and (ii) of clause (f) of sub-section (1) being completed, the Commission on
taking up the matter with the State Government or the appropriate authority
under clause (e) or (f) of sub-section (1) may, recommend to the State
Government or the appropriate authority, as the case may be, to institute
legal proceedings or prosecution in the matter and may also recommend to
the State Government or the appropriate authority, to appoint a counsel or a
special prosecutor for the conduct of any such legal proceedings or
prosecution; and the State Government may, having regard to the nature of
the case and on being satisfied that it is necessary, in its opinion, to appoint a
counsel or special prosecutor, do so.
(b) The State Government or the appropriate authority, as the case
may be, shall communicate in writing to the Commission, from time to time,
the progress of any such legal proceeding or prosecution filed on the
recommendation of the Commission.
(4) The State Government or the appropriate authority shall not apply
for withdrawal of any such case or proceedings instituted under sub-section
(3), without the prior consultation, in writing, with the Commission.
11. Government to consult Commission.- The State Government
shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting women.
12. Power of Commission to utilise the service of certain officers
and investigation agencies for conducting investigation.- (1) The
Commission may, for the purpose of conducting investigations under this
Act utilise the services of,-
(a) any officer or investigation agency of the State or the Central
Government with the concurrence of that Government ; or
(b) any other person.
(2) For the purpose of conducting an investigation, any officer or
agency referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) may, subject to the
direction and control of the Commission,-
(a) summon and enforce the attendance of any person and
examine him ;
(b) require the discovery and production of any document ; and
(c) requisition any public record or copy thereof from any office.
(3) Such officer or agency or the person shall investigate into the
matter as directed by the Commission and submit a report thereon
(hereinafter, in this section, referred to as "the investigation report"), to the
Commission within such period or extended period as may be specified or
extended by the Commission in this behalf.
(4) The Commission shall satisfy itself about the correctness of the
facts stated and the conditions, if any, arrived at in the investigation report
submitted to it under sub-section (3), and for this purpose the Commission
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH STATE COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1996 9
may make such inquiry (including the examination of the person or persons
who conducted or assisted in the investigation) as it thinks fit.
13. Statements made by persons to Commission.- No statement
made by a person in the course of giving evidence before the Commission or
an officer, or agency, referred to in clause (a), or the person appointed under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 12, shall subject him to, or be used
against him in any civil or criminal proceeding except a prosecution for
giving false evidence by such statement:
Provided that the statement,-
(a) is made in reply to a question which is required by the
Commission or such officer or agency or such person to
answer, or
(b) is relevant to the subject matter under investigation.
14. Registration of voluntary organisations and seeking their
assistance.- (1) Any voluntary organisation for women within the State may
seek registration with the Commission for the purposes of the Act. The
Commission may, after satisfying itself in the manner deemed fit by the
Commission about the value and role of such organisation in the society,
include the name of such organisation in its register.
(2) The Commission may maintain a register of voluntary
organisations within the State and more particularly women's organisations
whose assistance it may seek for the discharge of its functions.
(3) In discharge of its functions, the commission may seek the
assistance of any voluntary Organisations within the State, more particularly,
the women's organisations.
(4) A list of such organisations registered with the Commission shall
be made available to any court or authority, or, on request, to the members of
general public.
(5) If, for any reasons to be recorded in writing, the Commission
deems it fit to cancel the name of any organisation from its register, it may
do so, after giving such organisation a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
(6) The decision of the Commission about such cancellation shall be
final.
15. Protection of act done in good faith.- No suit, prosecution or
other legal proceedings shall lie against any member of the Commission or
any officer or other employee of the Commission or any person acting under
the direction either of the State Government or of the Commission, in respect
of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance
of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
16. Grants by State Government.- (1) The State Government shall,
after due appropriation made by the State Legislature by law in this behalf,
pay to the Commission by way of grants from the Consolidated Fund of the
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH STATE COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1996
State, such sums of money as the State Government may think for being
utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for
performing the functions under this Act, and such sums of money shall be
treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1).
17. Accounts and audit.- (1) The Commission shall maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of
accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government in
consultation with the Accountant General of the State of Himachal Pradesh.
(2) The annual accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the
Accountant General of the State at such intervals as may be specified by him
and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable
by the Commission to the Accountant General.
(3) The Accountant General and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act,
shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with
such audit as the Accountant General generally has in connection with the
audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other
documents and paper and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Accountant
General or any other person duly appointed or authorised by him in this
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to
the State Government, by the Commission.
18. Annual report.- The Commission shall prepare, in such form and
at such time for each financial year as may be prescribed, its annual report,
giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and
forward a copy thereof to the State Government.
19. Annual report and audit report to be laid before State
Legislature.- The State Government shall cause the annual report and all the
reports under clauses (b), (m) and (n) of sub-section (1) of section 10
together with the memorandum of action taken or proposed to be taken on
the recommendation contained therein, in so far as they relate to the State
Government and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of such
recommendations, and the audit report, to be laid as soon as may be after the
reports are received, before the State Legislature.
20. Chairperson, Members etc. to be public servants.- The
Chairperson, the members, officers and other employees of the Commission
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
21. Power to make rules.- (1) The State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette make rules for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH STATE COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1996 11
(2) Every rule made under this Act, shall, as soon as possible, after it
is made or issued, be laid on the table of the Legislative Assembly and if,
before the expiry of the Session in which it is so laid or the next session, the
Assembly makes any modification in any such rule or notification or the
Assembly decides that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done or omitted to be done under that
rule.
-------