An Act to provide for a framework for participation by persons other
than the State Government and Government agencies i n
financing, construction, maintenance and operation of
infrastructure projects and to raise resources on b ehalf of the
State Government for infrastructure development and for that
purpose to establish a Board and to provide for the matters
relating thereto .

1. Passed in Hindi by the Himachal Pradesh Vidhan S abha. For Statement of
Objects and Reasons see the Rajpatra, Himachal Prad esh (Extra-ordinary), dated
st December, 2001, pp. 3671 and 3687.
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001 3
BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the Stat e of Himachal
Pradesh in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
CHAPTER-I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent, scope and commencement .- (1) This Act may
be called the Himachal Pradesh Infrastructure Devel opment Act, 2001.
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Himacha l Pradesh.
(3) It shall apply to such infrastructure projects as are implemented by
a Government agency through private sector particip ation under the
provisions of this Act and fall in the category of infrastructure projects
specified in Schedule-I and such other infrastructu re projects as are notified
by the State Government, by notification, from time to time.
(4) It shall come into force on such date 1 as the State Government
may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, appo int.
2. Definitions .- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requir es,-
(a) "Act" means the Himachal Pradesh Infrastructure
Development Act, 2001;
(b) "Board" means the Himachal Pradesh Infrastructu re
Development Board established under section 3 of th is Act;
(c) "Capital" means the Capital for the time being raised or
authorised to be raised for the purposes of the Boa rd;
(d) "concession agreement or arrangement" means a c ontract of
the nature specified in Schedule-II between a devel oper and
the Government or a Government agency relating to a
project;
(e) "developer" means a person with whom a concessi on
agreement or arrangement is entered into by the
Government or a Government agency;
(f) "escrow account" means a bank account in which cash is
deposited or from which cash is withdrawn in such m anner
as specified in the concession agreement or arrange ment;
(g) "Financial year" means the period in respect of which any
annual accounts of the Board is laid before it, whe ther that
period is a year or not;
(h) "Government or State Government" means Governme nt of
Himachal Pradesh;

1. Act came into force from 28 th day of January, 2002 vide Notification No. Fin. IF (C) 45-1/99, dated 28 th January, 2002, published in the Rajpatra, Himachal
Pradesh (Extra-ordinary), dated 28 th January, 2002, pp. 3935-3936.
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT A CT, 2001
(i) "Government agency" means a Government Departme nt or
a Corporation or a body owned or controlled by the
Government or an authority established by or under any law
and includes a local authority;
(j) “infrastructure project” means facilities and s ervices
provided by a project, specified in Schedule-I;
(k) "investment" means preliminary and preoperative expenses,
capital expenditure, lease on land and equipment, i nterest
during construction, administrative expenses, expen diture
on acquisition of an existing infrastructure projec t owned
by the State Government or a Government agency, all
operating and maintenance expenses including expens es
incurred on recovery of user levies;
(l) "local authority" means a Municipal Corporation ,
Municipal Council, Nagar Panchayat, Zila Parishad,
Panchayat Samiti and Gram Panchayat;
(m) "member" means a member of the Board including
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer;
(n) "private sector participant" means any person o ther than
Central Government or State Government or Governmen t
Agency or any joint venture between Central Governm ent
or State Government Departments or any Statutory Bo dy or
Authority or Local Authority or any Corporation or
Company in which Central Government or State
Government or Government Agency, Statutory Body or
Authority or local body is holding not less than 51 % paid
up share capital;
(o) "private sector participation" means investment by a private
sector participant in an infrastructure project of the
Government agency or the local authority in the Sta te;
(p) "project" means project specified in Schedule-I ;
(q) "regulations" means regulations made by the Boa rd under
this Act;
(r) "Schedule" means Schedule appended to this Act;
(s) "Scheduled Bank" shall have the same meaning as assigned
to it in clause (e) of section 2 of the Reserve Ban k of India
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);
(t) "seal" means the common seal of the Board;
(u) "special purpose vehicle" means an independent entity set
up with the limited special purpose;
(v) "State Government guarantee" means a guarantee given by
the State Government to any agency;
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001 5
(w) "user charges" means the amount charged for the use of
facilities and services provided by the developer; and
(x) "user levies" means the right or authority gran ted to the
developer by the Government agency or the local aut hority
to recover investment and fair return on investment and
shall include toll, fee, charge or benefit by any n ame.
CHAPTER-II
ESTABLISHMENT AND CONSTITUTION OF THE BOARD
3. Establishment and incorporation of the Board.- (1) As soon as
may be after the commencement of this Act, the Gove rnment may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, establish a B oard to be called the
Himachal Pradesh Infrastructure Development Board w ith effect from such
date as may be specified in the notification.
(2) The Board shall be body corporate by name afore said having a
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispos e off property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and
be sued.
4. Headquarter of the Board .- The Headquarter of the Board shall
be at Shimla.
5. Constitution of Board .- The Board shall consist of,-
(a) the Chief Secretary to the Government who shall be the
Chairperson ;
(b) the Finance Secretary or any State Government o fficer of
other equivalent rank shall be the Chief Executive Officer, to
be appointed by the State Government, by notificati on;
(c) not exceeding ten other members, which shall in clude
Secretaries to the Government in the Departments of Power,
Public Works, Irrigation and Public Health, Urban
Development, Town and Country Planning, Tourism,
Industry, Finance and Planning, to be appointed by the
Government, by notification.
6. Term of office of members .- Every member shall hold office
during the pleasure of the State Government.
7. Filling up of casual vacancies .- If any vacancy arises in the Board
or in any committee thereof by reason of death, res ignation or otherwise, the
same shall be filled up by the Government as soon a s possible.
8. Meetings of Board .- (1) The Board shall meet at such time and
place and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of its
business at its meeting (including the quorum at su ch meeting) as may be
provided by regulations.
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT A CT, 2001
(2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason, he is u nable to attend any
meeting, any other member chosen by the members pre sent at the meeting,
shall preside over the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board
shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting,
and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chai rperson, or in his absence,
the person presiding, shall have and exercise a sec ond or casting vote.
9. Temporary association of persons with Board .- The Board may
associate with itself any person whose assistance o r advise is required in
performing any of its functions under this Act.
10. Constitution of Committees .- The Board may constitute an
Executive Committee and such other committees consi sting of such number
of members for performing such of its functions, as may be provided by
regulations.
11. Powers of Chairperson, Chief Executive Officer and
Committees.- The Chairperson, Chief Executive Officer and Commit tees of
the Board shall exercise such powers as may be prov ided by regulations.
12. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Board .-
(1) The Board may appoint such officers and other e mployees, as it may
consider necessary for the efficient discharge of i ts functions.
(2) The mode of recruitment, salary and allowances and other
conditions of service of officers and other employe es of the Board shall be
provided by regulations.
13. Acts and proceedings of Board presumed to be va lid . No act or
proceeding of the Board or of any of its committees shall be invalid merely by
reason of-
(a) any vacancy therein or any defect in the consti tution thereof,
or
(b) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merit of the
case.
CHAPTER-III
FUNCTIONS OF BOARD
14. Functions of Board .- The Board shall,-
(a) enable the private sector participation in infr astructure
projects specified in Schedule-I on any of the conc ession
agreement or arrangement specified in Schedule-II;
(b) identify suitable projects for private sector p articipation;
(c) undertake the development of projects for priva te sector
participation on its own or in association with age ncies
engaging in the business of project development or in
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001 7
pursuance of any agreement entered into for this pu rpose by
the Government with any person ;
(d) consider proposals to give exclusive rights to any person to
develop projects ;
(e) formulate the terms of any agreement or arrange ment for
project development and any concession agreement or
arrangements required for the implementation of pro jects
developed under clauses (c) and (d);
(f) invite private sector participation in respect of projects
developed as per clauses (c) and (d), as per the pr ocedure laid
down in this Act and make appropriate recommendatio ns to
the Government in the matter ;
(g) administer and manage a fund for the purpose of undertaking
or assisting in project development for meeting any financial
commitments envisaged under any concession agreemen t or
arrangement and for the performance of its other fu nctions
including its own administrative expenditure and to secure
contributions to this fund in the form of share cap ital or grants
or loans from Government and other sources includin g
bilateral and multilateral donor agencies, financia l institutions
and commercial banks;
(h) advise the Government or a Government Agency on all
matters of policy relating to private sector partic ipation in
infrastructure projects and their mode of implement ation
including issues relating to privatisation or disin vestment of
the existing infrastructure assets of the public se ctor ;
(i) co-ordinate the implementation of and monitor t he progress
of infrastructure projects undertaken in the State of Himachal
Pradesh under this Act;
(j) act as a special purpose vehicle to raise resou rces to finance
development expenditure under the State Plan on beh alf of
the State Government and also to discharge obligati ons on
this account on behalf of the State Government from revenue
and other receipts accruing to the State Government from
such development expenditure; and
(k) perform such other functions as may be entruste d to it by the
State Government, by notification.
CHAPTER-IV
PROCEDURE FOR PERFORMANCE OF FUNCTIONS OF
THE BOARD
15. Procedure for identifying Projects .- (1) For the identification of
projects for private sector participation in infras tructure development in
pursuance of section 14, the Board may consider sug gestions from
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT A CT, 2001
Government agencies or persons engaged in the busin ess of developing or
implementing infrastructure projects.
(2) The Board may itself conduct or have conducted on its behalf such
preliminary investigations as are necessary to esta blish the prima facie
suitability of the project for private sector parti cipation within the parameters
for a concession agreement or arrangement given in section 16 in identifying
the projects which can be developed for private sec tor participation.
(3) The Government agencies may opt to undertake th e development
of such identified projects on their own or with th e assistance of the Board.
16. Parameters for concession agreement or arrangem ent .- The
following parameters for a concession agreement or arrangement shall define
the suitability of a project for inviting private s ector participation, namely:-
(a) the concession agreement or arrangement may pro vide for the
transfer of a project taken up with private sector participation,
to the Government or its agencies not later than a period of 99
years from the date of agreement or arrangement of
implementation of a project ;
(b) the concession agreement or arrangement may pro vide for
financial participation by the Government or its ag encies in
any project up to a maximum of 20% of the project c ost and
the actual nature and quantum of this financial par ticipation
shall be based on the processes of due diligence an d
competitive bidding provided in the regulations fra med by the
Board for this purpose;
(c) the concession agreement or arrangement may pro vide for
such incentives to the project as are admissible un der the
concerned sectoral policy of the Government to prom ote
private sector participation or investment ;
(d) the concession agreement or arrangement may pro vide for
guarantees by the State Government or Government ag encies
in respect of liability of any Government agency wi th regard
to a project;
(e) the concession agreement or arrangement may pro vide for the
opening and operation of an escrow account with res pect to
any payments to be made to the project by the State
Government or any Government agency or any other pe rson
or persons;
(f) the concession agreement or arrangement may pro vide for
appropriate modes and terms for transfer of Governm ent land
and acquisition of private land for the purposes of project
implementation ;
(g) the concession agreement or arrangement may pro vide for
right to develop land for such purposes as are admi ssible
under the relevant statute; and
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001 9
(h) the concession agreement or arrangement may pro vide for the
levy of the charges for the facilities or services provided by
the project.
17. Procedure for implementing project development .- (1) In
deciding the manner in which an identified project is to be developed for
private sector participation from amongst the optio ns available under section
14, the Board shall have regard to its own capabili ties, offers available for
collaboration by other agencies and any agreement o r arrangement entered
into by the Government for this purpose with any pe rson and form such
special purpose vehicles, companies or entities on its own or as joint ventures
as may be prescribed by regulations.
(2) In considering a proposal for project developme nt by private
sector participation under section 14, the Board sh all ensure that any exclusive
right for project development conferred on such per sons is limited to a
specified period.
18. Coverage of risks in concession agreement or ar rangement .-
(1) The Board shall ensure that any concession agre ement or arrangement
formulated by the Board under section 14 is in cons onance with the
parameters given in section 16 and contains all nec essary covenants to take
care of the risks associated with the concerned pro ject.
(2) The concession agreement or arrangement shall s trive for the
optimum contractual structure with regard to the ne ed to balance the risks of
stakeholders, maximize efficiency and minimize cost s as may be prescribed
by regulations.
19. Board to form entities for project implementati on .- In order to
ensure implementation of a project developed under this Act, the Board may
form such special purpose vehicles, companies or en tities on its own or as
joint ventures as are deemed necessary for this pur pose, keeping in view the
need to comply with the conditions outlined in sect ion 16 with regard to the
involvement of Government or its agencies.
20. Procedure for inviting private sector participa tion in
developed projects .- (1) In inviting private sector participation and making
recommendations to the Government under section 14, the Board shall follow
a selection process, which adheres to accepted norm s of transparency and cost
effectiveness and the Board shall frame the regulat ions to lay down the
situations where competitive bidding method or othe r methods shall be
followed.
(2) In making a recommendation with regard to a pri vate sector
participant with respect to a project developed und er section 14, the Board
may recommend grant of first right of refusal to th e person developing the
project, however, such first right of refusal shall be granted only on the basis
of an appropriate procedure, which adheres to accep ted norms of transparency
and cost effectiveness.
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001
21. Fee .- (1) The Board may charge such fee, for carrying out any of
its functions, as prescribed by regulations or in t erms of any agreement or
arrangement entered into by it.
(2) The Board may also permit any person developing a project under
a person is undertaken by any other person.
22. Procedure to raise resources .- (1) For raising of resources for
financing development expenditure under the State P lan in pursuance of
transparency and cost effectiveness.
(2) The Board may take the assistance of recognised financial
institutions and reputed arrangers in performing th is function.
CHAPTER-V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT
23. Fund of Board .- (1) The Board shall have its own fund and all
receipts and sums which may, from time to time, be received by the Board
from the State Government or any other person or ag ency and the amount
charged by the Board under section 21, shall be cre dited thereto and all
payments of the Board shall be made therefrom.
(2) The Board shall have the power, subject to the provisions of this
Act, to spend such sums as it thinks fit to cover a dministrative expenses and
for the performance of its functions and such sums shall be treated as
expenditure payable out of the fund of the Board.
(3) All money standing at the credit of the Board w hich cannot
immediately be applied as provided in sub-section ( 2), shall be deposited in
the Scheduled Bank or Banks or in the Public Accoun t of the State
Government or may be deployed in such other manner and subject to such
conditions as are contained in regulations framed b y the Board for this
purpose.
24. Additional Capital and Grants to the Board by t he
Government .- The Government may, after due appropriation made by
Legislature by law in this behalf,-
(a) provide any capital, over and above the capital arising out of
the winding up of the Government Owned Companies, t hat
may be required by the Board for the discharge of i ts
functions under this Act or for any purpose connect ed
therewith on such terms and conditions as the Gover nment
may determine; and
(b) pay to the Board, on such terms and conditions as the
Government may determine, by way of loans or grants such
sums of money as the Government may consider necess ary
for the efficient discharge by the Board of its fun ctions under
this Act.
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001 11
25. Borrowing Power of the Board .- (1) The Board may, with the
consent of the Government or in accordance with the terms of any general or
special authority given to it by the Government, bo rrow money from any
source by the issue of bonds, debentures, loans or such other instruments as it
may deem fit for discharging all or any of its func tions under this Act.
(2) The Government may guarantee in such manner as it thinks fit for
the repayment of the principal and the payment of i nterest thereon with
respect to the loans borrowed by the Board under su b-section (1).
(3) Subject to such limits as the Government may, f rom time to time,
lay down, the Board may borrow temporarily by way o f overdraft or
otherwise such amounts as it may require for discha rging its functions under
this Act.
26. Accounts and Audit .- (1) The accounts of the Board shall be
prepared and maintained in such form and in such ma nner as may be provided
by regulations.
(2) The Board shall cause to be prepared for each F inancial year an
annual statement of accounts in such form as may be provided by regulations.
(3) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by a n auditor duly
qualified to act as an auditor of Companies under s ection 226 of the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
(4) The auditor shall send copy of the report toget her with audited
copy of accounts to the Board which shall, as soon as may be, after the receipt
of the audit report forward the same to the State G overnment.
(5) The State government shall cause the audit repo rt together with
audited copy of accounts to be laid before the Stat e Legislature, as soon as
may be, after the receipt of the same under sub sec tion (4).
27. Annual Report .- (1) The Board shall during each Financial year
prepare in such form and at such time as may be pro vided by regulations, an
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous
Financial year and an account of the activities lik ely to be undertaken by it in
current Financial year and copies of such report sh all be forwarded to the
State Government.
(2) The State Government shall cause every such rep ort to be laid
before the State Legislature, as soon as may be, af ter the receipt of the report
under sub-section (1).
CHAPTER-VI
MISCELLANEOUS
28. Winding up of the Government Owned Companies an d
transfer of assets and liabilities to the Board .- (1) The Government Owned
Companies shall be wound up in accordance with the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001
(2) Subject to the provisions of Companies Act, 195 6 (1 of 1956),
from such date as the State Government may, by noti fication in the Official
Gazette, appoint,-
(i) all properties and other assets vested in the G overnment
Owned Companies, immediately before such date, shal l vest
in the Board;
(ii) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurre d, all contracts
entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by,
with, or for the Government Owned Companies, immedi ately
before such date, shall be deemed to have been incu rred,
entered into and engaged to be done by, with or for the Board;
(iii) all non-recurring expenditure incurred by Gov ernment Owned
Companies up to such date and declared to be capita l
expenditure by the Government Owned Companies shall ,
subject to such terms and conditions as may be dete rmined by
the Government, be treated as the capital provided by the
Government to the Board;
(iv) all sums of money due to the Government Owned
Companies, immediately before such date, shall be d eemed to
be due to the Board;
(v) all suits and other legal proceedings institute d or which could
have been instituted by or against the Government O wned
Companies, immediately before such date, may be con tinued
or instituted by or against the Board;
(vi) all the employees holding any office under the Government
Owned Companies, immediately before such date, shal l be
treated as employees of the Board and shall hold of fice in the
Board on the same terms and conditions of service w hich
were applicable to them.
(3) If any dispute or doubt arises as to which of t he properties, rights
or liabilities of the Government Owned Companies tr ansferred to the Board or
as to which of the employees serving under the Gove rnment Owned
Companies are to be treated as employees of the Boa rd, under this section,
such dispute or doubt shall be decided by the Gover nment in consultation with
the Board and the decision of the Government shall be final.
Explanation .- For the purpose of this Act, the expression
"Government Owned Companies" shall mean the Himacha l Pradesh Road and
Other Infrastructure Development Corporation Limite d and Himachal Pradesh
Health Systems Corporation Limited incorporated und er the Companies Act,
(1 of 1956).
29. Members, officers and servants to be public ser vants .- All
members, officers and servants of the Board shall, while acting or purporting
to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act o r any regulations made
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001 13
thereunder, be deemed to be public servant within t he meaning of section 21
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).
30. Protection of action taken in good faith .- No suit, prosecution or
other legal proceeding shall lie against the Board or any member or officer or
servant of the Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or regulations made
thereunder.
31. Arbitration .- All agreements or arrangements entered into by t he
Board shall contain an arbitration clause providing that,-
(a) all parties to the agreement shall submit to ar bitration any
disputes which may arise between them out of the pr ovisions
of the agreement or arrangement ;
(b) the place of arbitration shall be at Shimla or any other place in
India agreed to by the parties ; and
(c) the disputes referred to in clause (a) shall be decided in
accordance with the law for the time being in force .
32. Power to make regulations .- (1) The Board may make
regulations not inconsistent with provisions of thi s Act for enabling it to
discharge its functions under this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the fore going power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the follo wing matters, namely:-
(a) the time and the place at which the Board shall meet and rules
of procedure, the Board shall observe in regard to transaction
of its business at its meeting under section 8 ;
(b) the committees which the Board may constitute, the number
of members which the Executive Committee and other
Committees may consist of and the functions of the Board
which they may perform under section 10;
(c) the powers of the Chairperson, Chief Executive Officer and
Committees of the Board under section 11;
(d) the mode of recruitment, salary and allowances and other
conditions of service of officers and other employe es of the
Board under sub-section (2) of section 12 ;
(e) the manner of disinvestment of assets of any Go vernment
agency under section 14;
(f) to regulate competitive bidding under section 1 6;
(g) to decide the manner in which an identified pro ject is to be
developed for private sector participation under se ction 17 ;
(h) the procedure for dealing with risks associated with various
infrastructure projects under section 18;
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001
(i) the manner of competitive bidding or other meth ods to be
followed under section 20;
(j) fee to be charged under section 21;
(k) the form and manner in which the accounts of th e Board shall
be prepared and maintained under sub-section (1) of section
26;
(l) the form in which an annual statement of accoun ts of the
Board shall be prepared under sub-section (2) of se ction 26;
and
(m) the form in which and the time at which an annu al report of
the Board shall be prepared under sub-section (1) o f section
27.
__________
SCHEDULE-I
[See section 1 (3)]
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
1. State Highways including Roads, Bridges, Bye pas ses and
related Road Infrastructure.
2. Inland Waterways.
3. Power including Power Generation, Transmission a nd
Distribution System project.
4. Water projects including dams, water storage, wa ter supply and
sewerage system projects.
5. Gas pipelines or related facilities.
6. Urban Infrastructure including shopping and comm ercial
complexes, parking lots, solid waste management and
transportation facilities etc.
7. Tourism project including resorts, adventure and winter sports
facilities, cable cares and ski lifts and entertain ment complexes
etc.
8. Industrial estates, industrial areas, parks incl uding development
of parks offering facilities to projects like infor mation
technology and biotechnology etc.
9. Satellite townships offering general purpose rea l estate or
specifically focussed on provision of education, he alth, resort or
entertainment facilities.
10. Any other infrastructure projects, notified by the State
Government.
__________

THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001 15
SCHEDULE-II
[See sections 2 (c) and 15 (a)]
NATURE OF CONCESSION AGREEMENT OR
ARRANGEMENT
The following concession agreement or arrangement w ith variations
and combinations may be arrived at by the Governmen t agency or the local
authority for undertaking infrastructure project wi th private sector
participation.
1. Build Own /Operate and Transfer Agreement or Arrang ement .- An
agreement or arrangement whereby the developer unde rtakes to finance,
construct, maintain and operate a project and where by such project is to vest
in the developer for a specified period. During the period of operation of the
project by developer, he may be permitted to charge user charges as specified
in an agreement or arrangement. The developer is re quired to transfer the
project to the State Government or a Government age ncy after the expiry of
the period of operation.
2. Build Own Operate and Maintain Agreement or Arrange ment .- An
agreement or arrangement whereby a developer undert akes to finance,
construct, operate and maintain a project and where by such project is to vest
in developer for a specified period. During the per iod of operation of the
project, he may be permitted to charge user charges as specified in the
agreement or arrangement.
3. Lease Management Agreement or Arrangement .- An agreement or
arrangement whereby the State Government or a Gover nment agency leases
a project owned by the State Government or the Gove rnment agency to the
person who is permitted to operate and maintain the project for the period
specified in the agreement or arrangement and to ch arge user charges
therefor.
4. Rehabilitate/Operate and Transfer Agreement or Arra ngement .- An
agreement or arrangement whereby an existing projec t is vested in a person
to renovate, operate and maintain for the period sp ecified in the agreement or
arrangement after the expiry of which the project i s required to be transferred
to the State Government or a Government agency. Dur ing the period of
operation of the project by the developer, he may b e permitted to charge user
charges as specified in the agreement or arrangemen t.
5. Rehabilitate Own Operate and Maintain Agreement or
Arrangement .- An agreement or arrangement whereby an existing project is
vested in a person to renovate, operate and maintai n. The developer shall be
permitted to charge user charges as specified in th e agreement or
arrangement.
6. Management Agreement or Arrangement .- An agreement or
arrangement whereby the State Government or the Gov ernment agency
entrusts the operation and management of a project to a person for the period
specified in the agreement or arrangement on paymen t of specified
consideration. In such agreement, the State Governm ent or the Government
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOMENT ACT, 2001
agency concerned may charge user charges and collec t the same either itself
or entrust the collection for consideration to any person who shall after
collecting the user charges pay the same to the Sta te Government or the
Government agency.
7. Service Contract Agreement or Arrangement .- An agreement or
arrangement whereby a developer undertakes to provi de services to the State
Government or a Government agency for the specified period. The State
Government or Government Agency shall pay him an am ount in accordance
with the agreement or arrangement.
------------