An Act to provide for preventing the juveniles from smoking, it is hereby
enacted as follows:
1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (i) This Act may be
called the Himachal Pradesh Juveniles (Prevention of Smoking) Act, 1952.
(ii) It shall extend1, to the whole of the Himachal Pradesh.
(iii) It shall come into force at once.
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the
subject or context:-

1. The Act extended to District Bilaspur by Notification No. 2-10/63-Med., dated
the 25th February, 1964, published in the Rajpatra, Himachal Pradesh dated 14th
March, 1964, p. 65, issued under section 3(2) of the Himachal Pradesh Merged
State (Application of Laws) Act, 1954, to the territories added to Himachal
Pradesh under section 5 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966 by H.P. Act No.
of 1969.
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH JUVENILES (PREVENTION OF SMOKING) ACT, 1952

(a) 'public place' means any place to which the public has, for the
time being, access whether on payment or otherwise and
includes a railway station and a railway carriage, or any
public conveyance;
(b) 'tobacco' means tobacco in any form and includes any
smoking mixture intended to be used as a substitute for
tobacco.
3. Penalty for selling tobacco to children.- Whosoever sells or
gives or attempts to sell or give, to a child apparently under the age of sixteen
years any tobacco shall be liable on conviction by any Magistrate to a fine not
exceeding fifty rupees in the case of a first offence and in the case of a second
or a subsequent offence to a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees.
4. Seizure of tobacco from Juvenile in a public place.- If any boy
or girl under the age of sixteen years be found smoking in any public place, it
shall be lawful for any lambaradar [****] teacher of a recognised school or
affiliated college, member of a Panchayat, or a Municipal committee or [Zila
Parishad] or a Notified Area Committee, legal practitioner or registered
medical practitioner or Magistrate to seize such tobacco and destroy it.
5. Summary trial.- All offences under this Act shall be triable by
Nayaya Panchayat, and if there is no Nayaya Panchayat having jurisdiction in
the area by a Magistrate of the second or third class, and the State
Government may confer powers to try summarily an offence or offences
under this Act on any officer or class of Officers invested with such powers.
____________

1. The word “Zialdar” omitted by A.O., 1973.
2. Substituted for the words “District Board” A.O., 1973.