An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to forests and
forest produce in the [State of Karnataka]1.
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to
forests and forest produce in the [State of Karnataka]1;
BE it enacted by the [Karnataka]1 State Legislature in the Fourteenth
Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement. — (1) This Act may be called
the [Karnataka]1 Forest Act, 1963.
(2) It extends to the whole of the [State of Karnataka]1.
(3) It shall come into force on such [date]1 as the State Government may,
by notification, appoint.
the end of the Act.
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(1) “cattle” includes cows, bulls, bullocks, elephants, camels, buffaloes,
horses, mares, geldings, ponies, colts, fillies , mules, asses, pigs, rams,
ewes, sheep, lambs, goats and kids;
[(1-A) "Consideration" means the price received or receivable on the
sale of forest produce and computed in such manner and shall also include
such other amount as may be prescribed by the St ate Government. ]1
1. inserted by Act 23 of 2016 w.e.f 16.08.2008.
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 357
(2) “district forest” includes all land at the disposal of Government not
included within the limits of any reserved or village forest nor assigned at the
survey settlement as free grazing ground or for any other public or
communal purposes:
Provided that it shall be competent for the State Government to modify or
set aside such assignment and constitute any such land as reserved, village
or district forest, or devote the same to any other purpose it may deem fit;
(3) [“Deputy Conservatore of Forest”]1 means the Chief Forest Officer of
a Forest Division;
the end of the Act.
(4) “Forest Division” means any area declared as such by a notification
by the State Government or by such authority as may be prescribed;
(5) “forest offence” means an offence punishable under this Act or under
any rule made thereunder;
(6) “Forest Officer” means any person appoint ed by or under the orders
of the State Government to be the [Principal Chief Conservator, [Additional
Principal Chief Conservator]2 Chief Conservator, Additional Chief
Conservator]1, Conservator, Deputy Conservator, Assistant Conservator,
Forest Ranger, Forester, Forest Guard or Forest Watcher, or to discharge
any function of a Forest Officer under this Act or any rule or order made
thereunder to be done by a Forest Officer;
(7) “forest produce” includes, —
(a) the following whether found in or brought from a forest or not, that is
to say, —
timber, charcoal, caoutchouc, catechu, [sandalwood]1, lootikai (Capparis
Mooni), wood oil, sandalwood oil, resin, [rubber latex, [x x x]3]5 natural
varnish, bark, lac, mahua or ippe (Bassia latifolia) flowers and seeds, seed
of Prosopis juliflora, kuth, and temburni or tupra (Diospyros Melanoxylon)
leaves, rosha (Cymbopogon Martini) grass and oil and myrabolams (Terminal ia Chebula, Terminalia Belerica and
[Phyllanthus Emblica,
ramapatre and shigakai)]4; and
is at the end of the Act.
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 358
(b) the following when found in, or brought from, a forest, that is to say: -
(i) trees and leaves, flowers and fruits, and all other parts or
produce not her einbefore mentioned, of trees;
(ii) plants not being trees, (including grass, creepers, reeds and
moss), and all parts or produce of such plants;
(iii) wild animals and pea fowls and skins, tusks, horns, bones, silk
cocoons, honey, and wax and all other parts or produce of wild animals, pea
fowls and insects; and
(iv) peat, surface soil, rock, and minerals (including limestone),
laterite, mineral oils, and all products of mines or quarries; and
[(iva) “cocoa beans or pods, garcinia fruits, thornless bamboos,
Halmaddi, Raldhupa and Kaidhupa”;]1
(v) such other products of forests as the State Government may, by
notification, declare to be forest produce;
(8) “land at the disposal of the State Government” means land in respect
of which no person has acquired, —
(a) a permanent, heritable and transferable right of use and occupancy
under any law for the time being in force; or
(b) any right created by grant or lease made or continued by or on
behalf of Government;
(9) “magistrate” means a magistrate of the first or second class;
(10) “notification” means a notification published in the official Gazette;
(11) “owner” includes a Court of Wards in respect of property under the
superintendence or charge of such cour t;
(12) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the State
Government under this Act;
(13) "protected forest" means any area at the disposal of Government
which has been placed under special protection under clause (ii) of subsection (2) of section 33 or is declared to be a protected forest under section
35;
(14) “reserved forest” means any land settled and notified as such in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter II of this Act;
(15) “reserved trees” means teak or sagavani (Tectona grandis), bl ack
wood or bite (Dalbergia latifolia), kino or honne (Pterocarpus marsupium),
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 359
myrobolam or gall nut or alale (Terminalia chebula), white cedar or
devagarge (Dysoxylum malabaricum), jalari (Shorea laccifera), benteak or
nandi (Lagerstroemia lanceolata), sa tin wood or huragalu (Chloroxylon
swietenia), soapnut or antawala (Sapindus emarginatus), karachi kamara
(Hardwickia binata), oil tree or yenne mara (Hardwickia pinnata), hebhalasu
(Artocarpus hirsuta), ebony or karimara or bale (Diospyrose benum), iron
wood or jambee (Xylia xylocarpa), poonspar or sura honne (Calophyllum
elatum), chittagong wood (Chickrassia tabularis), kiralbogi (Hopea
parviflora), kachu or kaggali (Acacia catechu), bore (Zizyphus jujuba),
sagade (Schleichera trijuga), yethega (Vanteak) ( Adina cordifolia),
tamarindus (indica), karimatti (Terminalia tomentosa), mavu (Mangifera
indica), kasarka (Strychnos nuxvomica), halasu (Artocarpus integrifolia), bili
matti (Terminalia arjuna), dhup (Ailanthus malabarica), and such other trees as the State Government may by notification, declare to be reserved trees
for purposes of this Act;
(16) “river” includes any stream, canal, creek, or other channel, natural or
artificial;
(17) “rule” means a rule made by the State Government under this Act;
[(18) “sandalwood” means any portion of a sandal (santalumalbum) tree
and includes bark, leaves and roots thereof, whether containing heartwood or not and whether in the form of roots, billets, pieces (sawn or otherwise)
chips (whether coloured or not and whether mixed with other ingredients or not), sawdust, spentwood, flakes or pulp
[and sandalwood oil]2 [but does
not include sandalwood manufactured in the form of sandalwood handicraft articles]
3;]1
(19) “Tahsildar” means the Tahsildar of a taluk;
(20) “timber” includes trees when they have fallen or have been felled,
and all wood whether cut up or sawn or fashioned or hollowed out for any purpose or not;
(21) “tree” includes palms, bamboos, stumps, brushwood and canes;
(22) “village forest” means any land notified as such in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter III of this Act.
[(23) “Village Forest Committee” means a Village Forest Committee
constituted under section 31A.]1
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 360

CHAPTER II
RESERVED FORESTS
3. Powers to constitute Reserved Forests. —The State Government
may constitute any land which is the property of the Government or over
which the Government has proprietary rights, or to the whole, or any part of
the forest produce of which the Government is entitled, a reserved forest in
the manner hereinafter provided.
4. Notification by Government. —(1) Whenever it has been decided to
constitute any land a reserved forest the State Government shall issue a notification, -
(a) declaring that it has been decided to constitute such land a
reserved forest;
(b) specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation and limit s of such
land; and
(c) appointing an officer (hereinafter called the “Forest Settlement
Officer”) to inquire into and determine the existence, nature and extent of
any rights claimed by or alleged to exist in favour of any person in or over
any land compr ised within such limits or in or over any forest produce, and
to deal with the same as provided in this Chapter.
Explanation. —For the purpose of clause ( b) it shall be sufficient to
describe the limits of the forest by roads, rivers, bridges, or other well -known
or readily intelligible boundaries.
(2) The officer appointed under clause ( c) of sub -section (1) shall, be a
person not holding any forest office except that of Forest Settlement Officer;
but a Forest Officer may be appointed by the State Governmen t to represent
it in the inquiry under this Chapter by the Forest Settlement Officer.
5. Proclamation by Forest Settlement Officer. —When a notification
has been issued under section 4, the Forest Settlement Officer shall publish
in Kannada and in any other regional language of the area, at the
headquarters of each taluk in which any portion of the land comprised in
such notification is situate and in every town and village in the
neighbourhood of such land a proclamation, —
(a) specifying, as nearly as possi ble, the situation and limits of the
proposed forest;
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 361
(b) setting forth the substance of the provisions of section 6;
(c) explaining the consequences which, as hereinafter provided, will
ensue on such forest being constituted a reserved forest; and
(d) fixing a period of not less than three months from the date of
publishing such proclamation, and requiring every person claiming any right
or making any claim referred to or mentioned in section 4, either to present
to such officer within such period a written notice specifying or to appear
before him within such period and state the nature of such right or claim (if
any) and in either case to produce all documents in support thereof.
The Forest Settlement Officer shall also serve a notice to the same effect
on every known or reputed owner or occupier of any land included in or
adjoining the land proposed to be constituted a reserved forest or on his
recognised agent or manager. Such notice may be sent by registered post to persons residing beyond the limits of the district in which such land is
situate.
6. Bar of accrual of forest rights. —(1) After the issue of a notification
under section 4, no right shall be acquired in or over the land comprised in such notification, except by succession or under a grant or contract in writing made or entered into by or on behalf of the Government or some
person in whom such right, or power to create such right, was vested when
the notification was issued; and on such land no new house shall be built or plantation formed, no fresh clearings for cultivation or for any other purpose
shall be made and no trees shall be cut for the purpose of trade or
manufacture except as hereinafter provided. No patta or right of occupancy shall without the previous sanction of the State Governm ent be granted, in
respect of such land, and every patta or right of occupancy granted without such sanction shall be null and void.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any act done under
the written permission of the Forest Settlement Officer.
(3) No civil court shall, between the dates of publication of the notification
under section 4 and of the final notification to be issued under section 17 entertain any suit to establish any right in or over any land or to the forest
produce of any land included in the notification under section 4.
7. Inquiry by Forest Settlement Officer. —The Forest Settlement Officer
shall take down in writing all statements made under clause ( d) of section 5
and shall, at some convenient place, inquire into all c laims duly preferred
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 362
under that section and into the existence and extent of any rights mentioned
in section 4 and not claimed under section 5 so far as the same may be
ascertainable from the records of the Government and the evidence of any
persons likely to be acquainted with the same.
The Forest Settlement Officer shall at the same time, consider and record
any objection which the Forest Officer, if any, appointed under sub- section
(2) of section 4 may make to any such claim or any information which he
may afford with regard to the existence and extent of any such right.
8. Powers of Forest Settlement Officer. —For the purpose of such
inquiry, the Forest Settlement Officer may exercise the following powers,
that is to say, —
(i) power to enter, by himself or any officer authorised by him for the
purpose, upon any land, and to survey, demarcate and make a map of the same; and
(ii) the powers of a civil court in the trial of suits.
9. Extinction of rights. —Rights in respect of which no claim has been
preferred under section 5, and of the existence of which no knowledge has
been acquired by inquiry under section 7, shall be extinguished unless,
before the final notification under section 17 is published, the person
claiming them satisfies the Forest Settlement O fficer that he had sufficient
cause for not preferring such claim within the period fixed under section 5 in
which case the Forest Settlement Officer shall proceed to dispose of the
claim as hereinafter provided.
10. Treatment of claims relating to shifting cultivation. —(1) In the
case of a claim relating to the practice of shifting cultivation the Forest
Settlement Officer shall record a statement setting forth the particulars of the
claim and of any local rule or order under which the practice is allowed or
regularised, and submit the statement to the State Government, together
with his opinion as to whether the practice should be permitted or prohibited
wholly or in part.
(2) On receipt of the statement and opinion, the State Government may
make an order permitting or prohibiting the practice wholly or in part.
(3) If such practice is permitted wholly or in part, the Forest Settlement
Officer may arrange for its exercise, —
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 363
(a) by altering the limits of the land under settlement so as to exclude
land of suf ficient extent, of a suitable kind, and in a locality reasonably
convenient for the purposes of the claimants, or
(b) by causing certain portions of the land under settlement to be
separately demarcated, and giving permission to the claimants to practice
shifting cultivation therein under such conditions as he may prescribe.
(4) All arrangements made under sub- section (3) shall be subject to the
previous sanction of the State Government.
(5) The practice of shifting cultivation shall in all cases be deemed a
privilege subject to control, restriction and abolition by the State
Government.
11. Power to acquire land over which right is claimed. —(1) In the
case of a claim to a right in or over any land, other than a right of way or
right of pasture, or a right o f forest produce or a watercourse or in respect of
any building standing on such land, the Forest Settlement Officer shall pass
an order admitting or rejecting the same in whole or in part.
(2) If such claim is admitted in whole or in part, the Forest Sett lement
Officer shall either, —
(i) exclude such land or, building from the limits of such reserved
forest; or
(ii) come to an agreement with the owner for the surrender of his
rights; or
(iii) proceed to acquire such land in the manner provided by the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894.
(3) For the purpose of so acquiring such land or building, —
(a) the Forest Settlement Officer shall be deemed to be a Deputy
Commissioner proceeding under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894;
(b) the claimant shall be deemed to be a perso n interested and
appearing before him in pursuance of a notice given under section 9 of that Act;
(c) the provisions of the preceding sections of that Act shall be
deemed to have been complied with; and
(d) the Forest Settlement Officer, with the consent o f the claimant, or
the court (as defined in the said Act), with the consent of the claimant and
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 364
the Deputy Commissioner of the district, may award compensation in land,
or partly in land and partly in money.
12. Order on claims to rights of way or pasture or to forest produce
or water. —In the case of claim to rights of way or pasture or to forest
produce or water, the Forest Settlement Officer shall pass an order
specifying the particulars of such claims and admitting or rejecting the same
in whole or in part.
13. Record to be made where claim is admitted. —If the Forest
Settlement Officer admits in whole or in part any claim under section 12, he
shall record the extent to which the claim is so admitted, specifying as far as
may be practicable, —
(a) the name, father’s name, residence, and occupation of the person
claiming the right;
(b) the designation, position and area of all fields or groups of fields (if
any) and the designation and position of all buildings (if any) in respect of which the exercise of suc h rights is claimed;
(c) in the case of rights of way, by whom they may be enjoyed, the width
of the way, and whether for vehicular traffic or for men and cattle only, and
the conditions, if any, attached to the right;
(d) in the case of pasturage, the num ber and description of cattle which
the claimant is from time to time entitled to graze in the forest, the season
during which such pasturage is permitted, and any conditions attached to the rights;
(e) in the case of forest produce, the quantity of timber or other forest
produce which the claimant is entitled to take or receive, whether the benefit
of such timber or other forest produce may be leased, sold or bartered and
such other particulars as may be necessary in order to define the nature, incidents and extent of the right;
(f) in the case of water, by whom and for what purposes the water may
be utilised, and any condition attached to its use.
14. Exercise of rights admitted. —(1) After making such record, the
Forest Settlement Officer, shall to the bes t of his ability and having due
regard to the maintenance of the reserved forest in respect of which the claim is made, pass such orders as will ensure the continued exercise of the rights so admitted.
(2) For this purpose, the Forest Settlement Officer may, —
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 365
(a) provide some other reasonably convenient right of way; or
(b) set out some other forest tract of sufficient extent and in a locality
reasonably convenient, for the exercise of rights to pasturage or other forest
produce, and record an order conferr ing such rights on claimants to the
admitted extent; or
(c) so alter the limits of the proposed reserved forest as to exclude the
tract over which rights of way or water extend or to exclude forest land of sufficient extent and in a locality reasonably convenient for the purpose of
the claimants with regard to pasturage or other forest produce and the land
so excluded may be either outside the boundaries of the forest as finally
settled or within them, in which latter case, it shall be demarcated and
notifi ed as an enclosure within which the rules relating to reserved forests
shall not apply; or
(d) record an order, continuing to claimants the right of way or to
pasturage or other forest produce or water (as the case may be) to the
admitted extent, at such s easons within such portions of the proposed
reserved forest, and under such rules, as may be prescribed to ensure the
continuance but non -abuse of such rights.
15. Compensation for rights. —In case the Forest Settlement Officer
finds it impossible, having due regard to the maintenance of the reserved
forest, to make such settlement under section 14, as shall ensure the continued exercise of the said rights to the extent so admitted, he shall
direct payment by the State Government of compensation determined on
the basis of the value of such right on the date of notification under section 4, in accordance with the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, in so
far as such provisions are applicable.
16. Appeal from order passed under section 11, section 12, section
or section 15. —(1) Any person who has made a claim under this
Chapter or any Forest Officer or other person generally or specially
empowered by the State Government in this behalf, may, within three
months from the date of the order passed on s uch claim by the Forest
Settlement Officer under section 11, section 12, or section 14, appeal to the
[Karnataka Appellate Tribunal]1 and the decision of the said Tribunal on
such appeal shall be final.
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 366
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order under section 15 may, within three
months from the date of the order appeal to the District Court and the
decision of the District Court on such appeal shall be final.
17. Notification declaring forest a reserved forest .—(1) When the
following events have occurred, namely: —
(a) the period fixed under section 5 for preferring claims has elapsed,
and all claims, if any, made under that section or section 9 have
been disposed of by the Forest Settlement Officer;
(b) if any such claims have been made, the period limited by section 16
for appealing from the orders passed on such claims has elapsed and all appeals (if any) presented within such period have been
disposed of; and
(c) all proceedings prescribed by sections 11 and 14 have been taken and all lands and buildings (if any) to be included in the proposed
reserved forest, which the Forest Settlement Officer has under section 11 elected to acquire under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894,
have become vested in the Government under section 16 of that
Act,
the State Government shall publish a notification specifying clearly
according to the boundary marks erected or otherwise, the limits of the
forest which is intended to constitute a reserved forest and declaring the
same to be a reserved forest from the date fixed by such notification, subject
to the exercise of rights (if any) specified in such notification.
(2) From the date so fixed, such forest shall be deemed to be a reserved
forest.
18. Publication of notification. —The Deputy Commissioner shall,
before the date fixed by such notification, cause a translation thereof into
Kannada and any other regional language of the area, to be published in the
official Gazette and at the headquarters of the taluk in which the forest is
situated, and in every town and village in the neighbourhood of such forest,
in the manner prescribed for the proclamation under section 5.
19. Power to revise arrangements made under section 14 and to
redefine the limits of reserved forests in certain cases. —(1) The State
Government may, within five years from the publication of any notification under section 17 revise any arrangement made under section 14 and may for this purpose rescind or modify any order made under section 14 and
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 367
direct that any one of the proceedings specified in section 14 be taken in
lieu of any other such proceedings or that the rights admitted under section
be compensated under section 15.
(2) Where the description of the limits of any reserved forest notified
under section 17 is defective or is not clear in reference to existing facts, the
State Government may, by notification, declare its intention to redefine the
limits of such reserved forest so as to remove the defect or to make the
description clear in reference to existing facts. Such notification shall specify
as nearly as possible the corrections which it is proposed to effect to the
limits of the reserved forest.
(3) On the issue of a notification under sub- section (2), the [ Deputy
Conservator of Forest]1 shall publis h at the headquarters of each taluk, in
which any portion of the land comprised in such notification is situate and in every town and village in the neighbourhood of such land, a notice, —
(a) specifying the corrections proposed by the notification under subsection (2); and
(b) stating that any objections which may be made in person or in
writing to the [Deputy Conservator of Forest]1, within a period of thirty days
from the date of publication of the noti ce will be considered by him.
(4) After the expiry of the period referred to in clause ( b) of sub- section
(3) and after considering the objections, if any, received by him, the [Deputy
Conservator of Forest]1 shall submit to the State Government the record of
the proceedings held by him together with a report thereon.
(5) The State Government may, after considering the report of the
[Deputy Conservator of Forest]1, by notification, redefine the limits of the
reserved forest, as proposed by the notification under sub- section (2) with
such modifications as it thinks fit or without any modifications:
Provided that if the notification redefining the limits of the reserved forest
affects the rights of any person in such reserved forest, the procedure laid down in sections 5 to 17 shall mutatis mutandis be applicable.
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 368
(6) Save as provided in sub- sections (2) to ( 5) of this section it shall not
be necessary to follow the procedure laid down in sections 4 to 17 before
issuing a notification under sub -section (5).
20. No right acquired over reserved forest except as provided. —No
right of any description shall be acquired in or over a reserved forest, except
by succession or under a grant or contract in writing made by or on behalf of
the State Government or some person in whom such right or the power to
create such right was vested when the notification under section 17 was
published.
21. Alienation of right in reserved forest. —(1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in section 20, no right continued under section 14 shall
be alienated by way of grant, sale, lease, mortgage or otherwise, without the
sanction of the Stat e Government:
Provided that, when any such right is appendant to any land or building it
may be sold or otherwise alienated with such land or building without such
sanction.
(2) The benefit of any right continued under section 14 shall not in any
case be l eased, sold or bartered except to the extent defined by the order
recorded under that section or under section 16, and any such lease, sale or
barter shall be void.
(3) Any person leasing, selling, or bartering the benefits of any right
continued under sec tion 14 in contravention of sub- section (2) shall, on
conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees.
22. Power to stop ways and water courses in reserved forests. —(1)
The Forest Officer may, with the previous sanction of the C hief Conservator
of Forests by order notified in the official Gazette, stop any public or private
way or water course in a reserved forest:
Provided that for the way or water course so stopped, another way or
water course which is equally convenient, already exists or has been provided or constructed:
Provided further that no water course feeding a tank or other reservoir
shall be stopped except after consulting the Executive Engineer having
jurisdiction over such tank or reservoir.
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub- section (1) may within
ninety days from the date of publication of the order in the official Gazette,
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 369
appeal to the [Karnataka Appellate Tribunal]1 and its decision thereon shall
be final.
23. Reserved forests constituted previous to passing of this Act. —
(1) Any forest which has been notified as a State Forest under the Mysore
Forest Act, 1900, or as a reserved forest under the Indian Forest Act, 1927,
the Madras Forest Act, 1882, or the Hyderabad Forest Act, 1355F, prior to
the date on which this Act comes into force, shall be a reserved forest under
this Act:
Provided that if the rights of private persons to or over any land or forest
produce in such forest shall not have been inquired into, settled and
recorded in a manner which the State Government deems sufficient, the
same shall be inquired into, settled and recorded in the manner provided by
this Act; and until such inquiry, settlement and record have been completed,
the operat ion of this section shall not abridge, or affect such rights.
(2) All questions decided, orders issued and records prepared in
connection with the constitution of such forest as a State Forest or reserved
forest shall be deemed to have been decided, issued and prepared under
this Act, and the provisions of this Act relating to reserved forests shall apply
to forests to which the provisions of sub- section (1) are applicable.
24. Acts prohibited in reserved forests. —Any person who, —
(a) makes any fresh clear ing prohibited by section 6, or
(b) sets fire to a reserved forest or in contravention of any rules made by
the State Government in this behalf, kindles any fire, or leaves any fire burning, in such manner as to endanger such a forest; or
any person who, in a reserved forest, —
(c) in contravention of the rules made in this behalf by the State Government, —
(i) kindles, keeps or carries any fire except at such seasons as the Forest Officer may notify in this behalf;
(ii) trespasses or pastures cattle, or permits cattle to trespass;
(d) causes any damage by negligence in felling any tree or cutting or
dragging any timber;
(e) fells, cuts, girdles, lops, taps or burns any tree or strips off the bark or leaves from, or otherwise damages the same;
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 370
(f) quarr ies stone, burns lime or charcoal, or collects, subjects to any
manufacturing process, or removes, any forest produce;
(g) clears or breaks up any land for cultivation or any other purpose;
[(gg) unauthorisedly occupies land for any purpose;]1
(h) damages, alters or removes any cairn, wall, ditch, embankment, fence,
hedge, or railing;
(i) poisons or dynamites water;
(j) in contravention [of any law or rules, enters any reserved forest with
fire arm s or any other weapon meant for hunting]1, hunts, shoots,
fishes or sets traps or snares, or
who abets committing of any of the above prohibited acts shall, on
conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
[one year or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees]2, or with
both, and in addition be liable to pay such compensation for the damage done to the forests as the convicting court may direct to be paid.
25. Acts excepted from section 24. —(1) Nothing in section 24 shall be
deemed to prohibit, —
(a) the exercise, in accordance with the rules, if any, made under section
14, of any right continued under that section; or
(b) the exercise of any right created by grant or contract in the manner
described in section 20; or
(c) any act done with the permission in writing of a Forest Officer duly
empowered to grant such permission, or under any rule made by the State Government.
26. Privileges may be granted in reserved forest s.—The State
Government may, in any reserved forest, grant such privileges as may be
consistent with the due maintenance of the forest; and may, without
assigning reason therefor, cancel such grant:
Provided that all privileges so granted shall previously be specified and recorded by the
Deputy Commissioner in the manner provided in section 13:
Provided further that the exercise of any privilege under this section shall
be for the use of the person entitled thereto, and not for the purpose of export, barter or merchandise.
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 371
27. Penalties for offences committed by persons having rights in
reserved forest. —Whenever fire is caused wilfully or by gross negligence
in a reserved forest by a person having rights in such forest or by any
person in his employment, or whenever any person having rights in such forest contravenes the provisions of section 21, the State Government may,
without prejudice to any punishment under this Act, direct that in such forest,
or any specified portion thereof, the exercise of all or an y of the rights of
pasture or to forest produce of any such person shall be extinguished, or for
such period as it thinks fit, be suspended.
28. Power to declare forests no longer reserved forests. —(1) The
State Government may, by notification, direct that , from a date to be
specified in such notification, any forest or any portion thereof constituted as
reserved forest under this Act, shall cease to be a reserved forest.
[Provided that no such notification shall be issued unless a resolution to
that effec t has been passed by both Houses of the State Legislature.]1
[Provided further that no such resolution shall be necessary where the
proposal relates to regularisation of unauthorised occupation of any
reserved forest or portion thereof, if such occupation was prior to the date of
commencement of the Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1978.]2
(2) From the date so specified such forest or portion shall cease to be a
reserved forest but the rights, if any, which have been extinguished therein shall not revive in consequence of such cessation.

CHAPTER III
VILLAGE FORESTS
29. Constitution of village forests. —(1) The State Government may, by
notification, constitute any land at the disposal of the Government, a village
forest for the benefit of any village community or group of village communities and may in like manner vary or cancel any such notification.
(2) Every such notification shall specify the limits of such village forest.
30. Power to make rules for village forests. —(1) The State
Government may make rules for regulating the management of village forests, prescribing the conditions under which the community or group of
communities for the benefit of which any such forest is constituted may be
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 372
provided with forest produce or with pasture, and their duties in respect of
the protection and improvement of such forest.
(2) The State Government may by such rules declare all or any of the
provisions of Chapter II of this Act to be applicable to village forests.
31. Inquiry into and settlement of rights. —All claims to any rights other
than rights of the village community or group of village communities for the
benefit of which such village forest is constituted, shall be inquired into,
recorded and provided for in the manner laid down in Chapter II of this Act.
[31A. Constitution of Village Forest Committee for Joint Forest
Planning and Management of Forest. —(1) For the purpose of Joint Forest
Planning and Management of forest, the State Government may by
notification constitute a Village Forest Committees in respect of a village or
group of villages.
(2) The Government may by rules provide for, —
(i) the powers, duties and responsibilities of Village Forest Planning
Committee;
(ii) the conduct of elections to the Committee;
(iii) qualification and disqualifications of Members of Village Forest
Committee;
(iv) the powers and duties of Forest Officer;
(v) preparation and execution of management plans;
(vi) protection, development and management of forest by the
Committee;
(vii) sharing mechanism, audit and accounts;
(viii) appointment of administrators or administrative Committees;
(ix) settlement of disputes;
(x) monitoring and evaluation; and
(xi) any other matter incidental thereto.]1

CHAPTER IV
DISTRICT FORESTS
32. Power to grant privileges in district forests. —The State
Government may, in any district forest, grant such privileges as it thinks fit in
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 373
regard to the removal by cultivating raiyats or other classes of persons of
forest produce required for prescribed purposes and may without assigning
reason therefor, cancel such grant:
Provided that the exercise of any privilege under this section shall be for
the use of the person entitled thereto, and not for the purpose of export or
merchandise.
33. Power to make rules for district forests. —(1) Subject to all rights
now legally vested in individuals and communities, the State Government
may, for any district o r portion of a district, make rules to regulate the use of
the forest produce or of the pasturage of any land at the disposal of
Government and not included in a reserved or village forest.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power suc h rules
may, —
(i) declare that certain trees not classed as reserved trees shall be
granted to cultivating raiyats on favourable rates of seigniorage;
(ii) provide for placing any area at the disposal of Government under
special protection in view of its subsequent settlement and constitution as a
reserved forest or for any other purpose, and prescribe the conditions and
penalties attendant on such special protection;
(iii) regulate or prohibit the grant of land and its clearing and breaking
up for culti vation or other purposes;
[(iiia) prohibit unauthorised occupation of land for any purpose;]1
(iv) regulate or prohibit the kindling of fires and prescribe the
precautions to be taken to prevent the spreading of fires;
(v) regulate or prohibit the felling, cutting, girdling, marking, lopping,
tapping or injuring by fire or otherwise of any trees, the sawing, conversion,
and removal of trees and timber and the collection and removal of other
forest produc e;
(vi) regulate or prohibit the quarrying of stone or gravel, the burning of
lime or charcoal, the smelting of ore, or the boiling of catechu;
(vii) regulate or prohibit the cutting of grass and pasturing of cattle, and prescribe
the payments (if any) t o be made for such cutting or pasturing;
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 374
(viii) regulate or prohibit hunting, shooting, beating or driving for game,
fishing, poisoning or driving for game, fishing, poisoning or dynamiting
water, and setting traps or snares;
(ix) regulate the disposal o f timber and other forest produce whether
by sale or by free grant;
(x) prescribe the fees, royalties or other payments for such timber
and other forest produce and the manner in which they shall be levied.
(3) In making a rule under this section, the St ate Government may
provide that a person guilty of contravention thereof shall, on conviction, be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.
(4) The land placed under speci al protection under a rule made in
pursuance of clause (ii) of sub- section (2), shall be called “protected forest”
and shall be duly notified as such in the official Gazette.
34. Suspension of rights in cases of fires caused wilfully or by
gross negligence. —Whenever fire is caused wilfully or by gross negligence
in any land notified as protected forest under sub- section (4) of section 33;
by any person having rights of pasture or to forest produce or by any person
in his employment, the State Government may , without prejudice to any
punishment under this Act direct that in such land, or any specified portion
thereof, the exercise of all or any rights of pasture or to forest produce of
any such person shall, for such period as it thinks fit, be suspended.
35. Minor forests constituted previous to the commencement of this
Act.—(1) Any forest in the State which has been notified as “minor forest”
under the Mysore Forest Act, 1900, or as “protected forest” under the Indian
Forest Act, 1927, or the Hyderabad Fores t Act, 1355 -F., prior to the date on
which this Act comes into force, shall be a protected forest under this Act and the provisions applicable to a protected forest shall be applicable to such forests.
(2) All questions decided, orders issued and records prepared in
connection with the constitution of such forests shall be deemed to have
been decided, issued and prepared under this Act.

CHAPTER V
CONTROL OVER FORESTS AND LANDS NOT BEING THE PROPERTY OF THE
GOVERNMENT
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 375
36. Interpretations. —For the purpose of this Chapter, —
(i) “forest” includes any land containing trees and shrubs, pasture lands
and any land whatsoever which the State Government may, by notification
under this section declare to be a forest;
(ii) “owner” in relation to a forest includes a mor tgagee, lessee or other
person having right to possession and enjoyment of the forest.
37. Preservation of private forests. —(1) No owner of any forest and no
person claiming under him, whether by virtue of a contract, licence or any
other transaction enter ed into before or after this Act comes into force, or
any other person shall, without the previous permission of the [ Deputy
Conservator of Forest]1, cut or girdle trees or do any act likely to denude the
forest, or diminish its utility as a forest:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to the
removal of fallen trees or any act done for the usual or customary domestic purposes or for making agricultural implements for bona fide use of the
owner.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), the State
Government may, by notification, and for reasons to be specified in such
notification, exempt any class of forests, or class of trees or any forest
produce therein from all or any of the provisions of this section.
38. Power to make rules. —For the purpose of section 37, the State
Government may make rules prescribing, —
(a) the classes or kinds of trees which may be permitted to be cut and
girdled and the girth of such trees;
(b) the terms and conditions subject to which permission may be granted;
and
(c) the procedure to be followed by the
[Deputy Conservator of Forest]1
before granting permission.
39. Protection of forests for special purposes. —(1) The State
Government may, by notification, —
(a) regulate or prohibit in any forest, —
(i) the breaking up or clearing of any land;
(ii) the pasturing of cattle;
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 376
(iii) the firing or clearing of vegetation;
(iv) the girdling, tapping or burning of any tree or the stripping of
bark or leaves from any tree;
(v) the lopping or pollarding of trees;
(vi) the cutting, sawing, conversion or removal of trees and timber; or
(vii) the quarrying of stones or the burning of lime or char coal or the
collection or removal of any forest produce or its subjection to any
manufacturing process;
(b) regulate in any forest the regeneration of forests and their
protection from fire;
(c) regulate the exercise of customary and prescriptive rights in such
forest or forests.
(2) When such regulation or prohibition appears necessary, the State
Government may, by notification, provide, —
(a) for the conservation of trees and forests;
(b) for the preservation of and improvement of soil or the reclamation
of saline or water logged land, the prevention of land slips or the formation
of ravines and torrents or the protection of land against erosion, or the
deposit thereon of sand, stones or gravel;
(c) for the improvement of grazing;
(d) for the maintenance o f water supply in springs, rivers and tanks;
(e) for the maintenance, increase and distribution of the supply of
fodder, leaf manure, timber or fuel;
(f) for the maintenance of reservoirs, or irrigation works and hydroelectric works;
(g) for protection ag ainst storms, wind, rolling stones, floods and
drought;
(h) for the protection of roads, bridges, railways and other lines of
communication; and
(i) for the preservation of public health.
(3) The State Government may, for any purpose referred to in subsections (1) and (2), construct at its own expense, in any forest, such work
as it thinks fit.
40. Appeals. —Any person aggrieved by an order under sub -section (1)
of section 37, i n regard to the sanction or the permission referred to in that
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 377
sub-section may, within thirty days from the date of the receipt of the order,
prefer an appeal in writing to the Deputy Commissioner and the Deputy
Commissioner after following the prescribed procedure may pass such
orders thereon as he deems fit.
41. Penalties. —(1) Whoe ver contravenes the provisions of sub- section
(1) of section 37 or of the rules framed under section 38 or any of the terms of a notification under section 39, shall, without prejudice to any other action
under this Act, on conviction, be punishable with i mprisonment which may
extend to six months or with fine or with both.
[(2) x x x]1
42. Bar of suits. —No order of the State Government or a Forest Officer
not below the rank of a [Deputy Conservator of Forest ]1 under this Chapter
and no notification issued by the State Government under section 39, shall
be liable to be questioned in any court of law.
43. Power to assume management of forests. —(1) In case of any
breach or neglect of the provisions of section 37 or of rules made under section 38 or wilful disobedience to any regulation or prohibition notified under section 39 or if the purposes of any work to be constructed under that
section so require and when i t appears to the State Government that it is
necessary for the purpose of preservation and protection of the forest in
public interest to assume management of such forest, the State Government
may, after notice in writing to the owner of such forest and af ter considering
his objections, if any, by notification assume management of such forest and
may by notification declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act,
relating to reserved forests shall apply to such forest. A notification
assuming managem ent of a forest under this sub- section shall be
conclusive.
(2) The notice referred to in sub- section (1) and the notification, if any,
issued assuming management of the forest shall be served on the owner of
such forest in the manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(Central Act V of 1908), for the service of the summons.
(3) The management of the forest by the State Government shall be
deemed to commence from the date of publication of the notification under
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 378
sub-section (1) in the official Gazette, and the State Government shall
appoint a Forest Officer to be in charge of the forest.
(4) (a ) The State Government shall, during the period of management of
a forest pay, at prescribed intervals, to the owner of the forest,
compensation, which shal l be the aggregate of, —
(i) an allowance calculated on the total area of the forest as determined by the Conservator of Forests at the rate of ten naye
paise per acre per annum; and
(ii) the net profits, if any, accuring from the working and management
of the forest.
(b) For the purpose of calculating the net profits, the total expenditure
incurred on the working and management of the forest shall be adjusted against the total income from the working and management up to the date of
account and the amount of any deficit shall be carried forward with interest
at the prescribed rate from year to year till such amount is made up and surplus is effected.
(5) (a ) During the period of management the State Government shall
receive all revenues accruing from the working and management of the
forest and shall pay the whole expenditure incurred in the working and
management of such forest, and the owner of such forest or any other
person shall not be entitled to make any objection to any expenditure that
the State Gov ernment may consider it necessary on such working and
management.
(b) The State Government shall maintain the revenue and expenditure
account of the forest and shall at the request of the owner furnish to him an
extract of the yearly account so maintained.
44. Consequences of assumption of management. —On the
assumption of management of any forest by the State Government under
(a) all legal proceedings pending, and all processes, executions or
attachments in force in respect of debts and liabilities enforceable against
the forest or any part thereof shall be suspended, and so long as the
management by the State Government continues, no fresh proceedings,
processes, executions or attachments shall be instituted, issued, enforced
or executed in respect thereof;
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 379
(b) so long as the management by the State Government continues, the
owner of the forest shall be incompetent, —
(i) to enter into any contract with respect to the forest;
(ii) to mortgage, charge, le ase or alienate the forest or any part
thereof or any product thereof; or
(iii) to grant valid receipts for the rents or profits arising or accruing
therefrom;
(c) so long as the management by the State Government continues,
subject to the orders of the S tate Government, no person other than the
Forest Officer placed in charge of the forest shall be competent to do the
acts referred to in sub- clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of clause ( b);
(d) subject to the orders of the State Government, the Forest Officer
placed in charge of the forest, shall during the period of management of the
forest, have all the powers which the owner thereof might as such have
exercised for the purposes of management and shall receive and recover all
rents and profits due in respect of the property under management; and for
the said purposes in addition to any powers of the owner, the Forest Officer,
shall be competent to exercise any power which he can exercise in respect
of a reserved forest.
45. Period of management. —(1) The period o f management of any
forest shall be for ten years from the date of publication of the notification
under sub- section (1) of section 43, but such period may thereafter be
extended by notification for successive periods of not more than ten years
each:
Provi ded that the period of such management shall not in the aggregate
exceed thirty years from the date of publication of the notification under subsection (1) of section 43 assuming management of the forest.
(2) The Forest Officer under whose management the forest is placed
shall, not later than six months before the expiry of any period referred to in sub-section (1), make a report to the State Government regarding such
control and shall state therein whether in his opinion, any period of management should be extended.
(3) After considering any such report and subject to sub -section (1), the
State Government shall decide whether to extend any period of management or whether to terminate it in the manner provided in section
46.
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 380
(4) No period of management shal l be extended unless the owner has
been given reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such extension
and the State Government is satisfied that such extension is necessary for
the preservation and protection of the forest.
46. Termination of management. —(1) If the State Government decides
to terminate any period of management of any forest, it shall, by notification,
published in the official Gazette, and in such other manner as may be prescribed declare such termination; and thereupon possession of the forest
shall be given to the owner, or if the owner be dead, to any person entitled to such possession, together with any sum of money which may be standing
to the credit of such owner.
(2) All acts done or purporting to be done by the Forest Officer in respect
of any forest placed under his management, during the period of such
management, shall be binding on the owner of such forest or any person to whom possession of the forest has been delivered under this section.
(3) After the period of terminati on of management of any forest,
notwithstanding anything contained in the
[Limitation Act, 1963]1, but
subject to any law which may then be in force, all proceedings, processes, executions or attachments suspended under clause (a) of section 44 shall stand revived and may be proceeded with from the stage at which they were suspended, and all proceedings, processes, executions or attachments
stayed under the said clause may be instituted, issued, enforced or
executed from the stage at which they were stayed.
47. Government management of forests at request of owners. —(1)
Any owner of any land or, if there be more than one owner thereof the owners of all the shares therein may, with a view to the formation or
preservation of forest thereon, apply in writing to the State Government to take over the management of such land and the State Government may, on
such application, where it is of opinion that it is expedient in public interests
to form or preserve the forest, by notification, assume the management of such land.
(2) When the management of any land is assumed under sub- section (1),
save as otherwise agreed to between the State Government and the applicants, the net profits, if any, arising from the management of the land shall be paid to the owners.
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 381
(3) The period of management shall be such as may be agreed to
between the State Government and the applicants.
(4) In all other respects the provisions of this Chapter in respect of a
forest the management of which has been assumed by the State
Government under sub -section (1) of section 43 shall be applicable.
48. Acquisition of forests in certain cases. —In any case under this
Chapter, in which the State Government considers that, in lieu of assuming the managem ent of a forest, the same should be acquired for public
purposes, the State Government may proceed to acquire it in the manner
provided by the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
49. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to any of the provisions of this Chapter, the State Government may, as
occasion may arise, by notification, do anything which appears to it to be
necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty.

CHAPTER VI
CONTROL OF TIMBER AND OTHER FOREST PRODUCE IN TRANSIT
50. Power to make rules to regulate transit of forest produce. —(1)
The control of all rivers and their banks as regards the floating of timber, as
well as the control of all timber and other forest produce in transit by land or water, is vested in the State Government, and it may make rules to regulate
the transit of all timber and other forest produce.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power such rules may, —
(a) prescribe the routes by which alone timber or other f orest produce
may be transported or moved into, from or within the State;
(b) prohibit the transport, into, within or outside, the State, of such
timber or prohibit collection or moving of such timber or other produce
without a pass from an officer duly authorised to issue the same, or otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of such pass, and in the
case of timber without affixing a Government transit mark;
(c) provide for the issue, production and return of such passes and in
the case of timber for affixing Government transit marks and for the payment
of fees for issue of the passes and for affixing such marks;
(d) in the case of timber formed into a raft or fastened to the shore,
prohibit the loosening or the setting adrift of such timber by any person not
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 382
the owner thereof or not acting on behalf of such owner or of the
Government;
(e) provide for the stoppage, reporting, examination and marking of
timber or other forest produce in transit, in respect of which there is reason
to believe that any m oney is payable to the Government or to which it is
desirable for the purposes of this Act to affix a mark;
(f) provide for the establishment of check posts or the erection of
barriers at such places as the State Government may direct, with a view to
prevent or check commission of forest offences in respect of forest produce
and for the stoppage, reporting and examination of goods carried by any
vehicle or vessel at such check posts or barriers;
(g) provide for the establishment and regulation of depots to which
such timber or other forest produce shall be taken by those in charge of it for examination, or for the payment of such money or in order that such marks
may be affixed to it; and the condition under which such timber or other
forest produce shall be brought to, stored at and removed from such depots;
and for regulating the appointment and duties of persons employed thereat;
(h) authorise the transport of such timber or other forest produce
across any land, and provide for the award and payment of com pensation
for any damage done by the transport of such timber or other forest produce;
(i) prohibit the closing up or obstructing of the channel or banks of any
river used for the transit of timber or other forest produce, and the throwing
of grass, brushw ood, branches or leaves into any such river or any act
which may cause such river to be closed or obstructed;
(j) provide for the prevention or removal of any obstruction of the
channel or banks of any such river, and for recovering the cost of such
prevention or removal from the persons whose acts or negligence necessitated the same;
(k) prohibit absolutely or subject to conditions,
[within the whole of the
State of Karnataka or specified local limits]1, the establishment of saw pits,
saw mills, or any ot her sawing contrivance, and the converting, cutting,
processing, distilling, storing, burning, concealing, marking or supermarking of timber or other forest produce, the altering or effacing of any marks on the
same, or the possession or carrying of marking hammers or other
implements used for marking timber;
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 383
[(ka) regulate (including requiring the owner or proprietor to obtain a
licence [or to get it renewed]2) the existing saw pits, [starting new saw pits]2
saw mills or any other sawing contrivance;]1
[(kb) provide for levy of fee for grant or renewal of licence for saw
mills, saw pits and other sawing c ontrivances;]1
(l) regulate the use of property marks for timber or other forest
produce, and the registration of such marks; prescribe the time for which
such registration shall hold good; limit the number of such marks that may
be registered by any one person and provide for the levy of fees for such
registration.
(3) In making a rule under this section, the State Government may
provide that person guilty of contravention thereof shall, on conviction, be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; and where the contravention is committed after sunset or before sunrise, or after
preparation for resistance to lawful authority, or where the offender has
been previously convicted for a like offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or
with both.
51. The State Government and Forest Officer not liable for damage
to fo rest produce at depot. —The State Government shall not be
responsible for any loss or damage which may occur in respect of any
timber or other forest produce while at a depot established under rules
made under section 50, or while detained elsewhere, for the purpose of this
Act, and no Forest Officer shall be responsible for any such loss or damage, unless he causes such loss or damage wilfully, negligently, maliciously or
fraudulently.
52. All persons bound to aid in case of accident at depot. —In case of
any accident or emergency involving danger to any property at any such
depot, every person employed at such depot whether by the State Government or by any private person, shall render assistance to any Forest
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 384
Officer or Police Officer demanding his aid in averting such danger or
securing such property from damage or loss.
CHAPTER VII
COLLECTION OF DRIFT AND STRANDED TIMBER
53. Certain kinds of timbers to be deemed property of State
Government until title thereto proved. —(1) All timber found adrift,
beached s tranded or sunk; all wood or timber bearing marks which have not
been registered in accordance with the rules made under section 50 or
which have been supermarked or on which the marks have been
obliterated, altered or defaced by fire or otherwise; and in such areas as the
State Government directs, all unmarked wood and timber; shall be deemed
to be the property of the State Government unless and until any person
establishes his right and title thereto, as provided in this Chapter.
(2) The timber referred t o in sub- section (1) may be collected by any
Forest Officer or other person entitled to collect the same by virtue of any rule made under section 59 and may be brought to any depot which the
Forest Officer may notify as a depot for the reception of drift t imber.
(3) The State Government may, by notification, exempt any class of
timber from the provisions of this section.
54. Notice to claimants of drift timber. —Public notice shall from time to
time be given by the Forest Officer, of timber collected under s ection 53.
Such notice shall contain a description of the timber and shall require any
person claiming the same to present to such officer, within a period of not
less than thirty days from the date of such notice a written statement of such
claim.
55. Procedure on claim preferred to such timber. —(1) When any such
statement is presented under section 54, the Forest Officer may, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, either reject the claim after recording
his reasons for so doing, or accept the claim and deliver the timber to the
claimant.
(2) If such timber is claimed by more than one person, the Forest Officer
may either deliver the same to any of such persons whom he deems entitled
thereto or may refer the claimants to the civil court, and retain the timber or
wood pending the receipt of an order from any such court for its disposal.
(3) Any person whose claim has been rejected under this section, may
within ninety days from the date of intimation of the order of such rejection,
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 385
institute a suit to re cover possession of the timber claimed by him; but no
person shall recover any compensation or costs against the State
Government, or against any Forest Officer, on account of such rejection, or
the detention or removal of any timber or wood, or the delivery thereof to any other person under this section.
(4) No such timber shall be subject to process of any civil, criminal or
revenue court until it has been delivered or a suit brought as provided in this
section, has been decided.
56. Disposal of unclaimed timber. —If no statement is presented under
within the period fixed by the notice issued under section 54 or on such
claim having been so preferred by him and having been rejected, omits to
institute a suit to recover possession of such timber within the further period
fixed by section 55, the ownership of such timber shall vest in the State
Government free from all encumbrances, or, when such timber has been
delivered to another per son under section 55, in such other person free from
all encumbrances not created by him.
57. State Government and its officers not liable for damage to such
timber. —The State Government shall not be responsible for any loss or
damage which may occur in respect of any timber collected under section
and no Forest Officer shall be responsible for any such loss or damage,
unless he causes such loss or damage wilfully, negligently, maliciously or fraudulently.
58. Payments to be made by claimant before timbe r is delivered to
him.—No person shall be entitled to recover possession of any timber
collected or delivered as aforesaid until he has paid to the Forest Officer or other person entitled to receive it such sum on account thereof as may be due under any rule made under section 59.
59. Power to make rules. —(1) The State Government may, by
notification, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power such rules may be made to regulate the following matters, namely: —
(a) the salving, collection and disposal of all timber mentioned in
(b) the use and registration of boats or any other contrivance used in
salving and collecting timber;
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 386
(c) the amounts to be paid for salving, collecting, moving, storing, or
disposing of such timber; and
(d) the use and registration of hammers and other instrument to be
used for marking such timber.
(3) In making a rule under this section, the State Government may
provide that a perso n guilty of a contravention thereof shall, on conviction,
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER VIII
CATTLE TRESPASS
60. Application of Cattle Trespass Act , 1871. —Cattle trespassing in a
reserved forest or village forest, or in a portion of a district forest which has
been lawfully closed to grazing under the provisions of section 33, shall be
deemed to be cattle doing damage to a public plantation within the meaning
of section 11 of the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871, and may be seized and
impounded as such by any Forest Officer or Police Officer.
61. Power to alter fines fixed under that Act. —The State Government
may, by notification, direct that, in lieu of the fines fixed under section 12 of
the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871, there shall be levied for each head of cattle
impounded under section 60 of this Act such fines as it deems fit, but not
exceeding the following, that is to say: —
For each elephant ... Twenty rupees
For each buffalo or camel ... Four rupees
For each horse, mare, gelding, pony, colt,
filly, mule, bull, cow, bullock or heifer. ... Two rupees
For each calf, ass, pig, ram, ewe, sheep,
lamb, goat or kid ... One rupee
CHAPTER IX
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
62. Seizure of property liable to confiscation. —(1) When there is
reason to believe that a forest offence has been committed in respect of any
forest produce, such produce, together with all tools, boats, vehicles or
[cattle or any other property used]1 in committing any such offence, may be
seized by any Forest Officer or Police Officer.
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 387
(2) Any Forest Officer or Police Officer may, if he has reason to believe
that a vehicle has been or is being used for the transport of forest produce in
respect of which there is reason to believe a forest offence has been or is
being committed, require the driver or other person in charge of such vehicle to stop the vehicle and cause it to remain stationary as long as may
reasonably be necessary to examine the contents in the vehicle and inspect all records relating to the goods carried which are in the possession of such driver or other person in charge of the vehicle.
(3) Every officer seizing any property under this section
[x x x]1 shall, as
soon as may be, [make a report of such seizure, —
(a) where the offence on account of which the seizure has been made
is in respect of timber, ivory, [gulmavu (machilus macrantha) bark, dalchini
bark, halmaddi (exudation of ailanthus malabaricum), canes]3, firewood or
charcoal which is the property of the State Government or in respect of sandalwood, to the concerned authorised Officer under section 71A; and
(b) in other cases, to the magistrate having jurisdiction to tr y the
offence on account of which the seizure has been made;]

Provided that when the forest produce with respect to which such offence
is believed to have been committed is the property of Government, and the
offender is unknown, it shall be sufficient if the officer makes, as soon as
may be, a report of the circumstances to his official superior.
[62A. Powers of Forest Officer in the matter of Investigation. - (1)
Any Forest Officer not below the rank of a Range Forest Officer and within
such specified area as the State Government may, by notification specify,
may as regards offences under this Act exercise powers conferred on an
Officer incharge of a police station by the provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:
Provided that any such power shall be subject to such restrictions and
modifications, if any, as the State Government may specify.
(2) For t he purpose of section 156 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, the area in regard to which the forest Officer is empowered under
sub-section (1), shall be deemed to be a police station and such Officer
shall be deemed to be the Officer -incharge of such station.
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 388
62B. Report by Investigation Officer. - If on any investigation by a
Forest Officer empowered under sub- section (1) of section 62A, it appears
that there is sufficient evidence to justify the prosecution of the accused
person, the investigating of ficer shall submit a report (which shall, for the
purposes of section 190 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, be deemed to
be a police report) to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to enquire into or try
the case and empowered to take congnizance of offences on police reports.
62C. Certificate of Forest Officer to be an evidence. - Any document
purporting to be a certificate under the hand of a Forest Officer not below the rank of a Range Forest Officer who has undergone training in the
examination of forest pr oduce and who is so authorised by the State
Government in this behalf in respect of forest produce, submitted to him for
examination and report, may be used as evidence of the facts stated in such
certificate in any proceedings under this Act; but the cour t may, if it things fit,
and shall on the application of the prosecution or the accused person
summon and examine any such Forest Officer as to the subject matter of his
certificate.]

63. Power to release property seized under section 62. —Any Forest
Officer of a rank not inferior to that of a Forest Ranger who, or whose subordinate, has seized any tools, boats, vehicles or cattle
[under section
may, subject to section 71G release]1 the same on, [production of a
Bank guarantee equal to the value as estimated by such officer (which shall be renewable from time to time till the final disposal of the criminal
proceedings instituted in respect of the alleged offence) and on]
the
execution by the owner thereof of a bond for the production of the property
so released if and when so required before the magistrate having jurisdiction
to try the offence on account of which the seizure had been made.
[64. x x x]1
[64A. Penalty for unauthorisedly taking possession of land
constituted as reserved forest, [district forest, village forest, protected
forest and any other land under the control of the Forest
Department]2.—(1) Any person unauthorisedly occupying any land in
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 389
reserved forest, [district forest, village forest, protected forest and any other
land under the control of the Forest Department]2 may, without prejudice to
any other action that may be taken against him under any other provision of
this Act or any other law for the time being in force, be summarily evicted, by
a Forest Officer not below the rank of an Assistant Conservator of Forests
and any crop including trees raised in the land and any building or other
construction erected thereon shall, if not removed by him within such time
as the Forest Officer may fix, be liable to forfeiture:
Provided that before evicting a person under this s ub-section he shall be
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) Any property forfeited under sub -section (1) shall be disposed of in
such manner as the Forest Officer may direct and the cost of removal of any
crop, building or other work and of all works necessary to restore the land to
its original condition shall be recoverable from the person evicted in the
manner provided in section 109.
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Forest Officer under subsection (1) may, within such period and in such manner as may be
prescribed, appeal against such order to the State Government or to such
officer as may be authorised by the State Government in this behalf and the order of the Forest Officer shall, subject to the decision in such appeal, be
final.]

65. Forest produce, tools, etc., when liable to forfeiture. —(1) All
timber or forest produce which is not the property of Government and in
respect of which a forest offence has been committed and all tools, boats,
vehicles and cattle used in committing any forest offence, [shall, subject to
State Government.
(2) Such forfeiture may be in addition to any other punishment prescribed
for such offence.
66. Disposal, on conclusion of trial for forest offence, of produce in
respect of which it was committed. —When the trial of any f orest offence
is concluded any forest produce in respect of which such offence has been committed shall, if it is the property of Government or has been forfeited, be
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 390
taken charge of by a Forest Officer, and, [in any other case may, subject to
67. Procedure when offender is not known or cannot be found. —
When the offender is not known or cannot be found, the magistrate, may, if
he finds, [that an offence has been committed, subject to section 71G]1,
order the property in respect of which the offence has been committed to be
forfeited to the State Government together with tools, boats, vehicles or
cattle and other articles used in committi ng the offence and taken charge of
by the Forest Officer, or to be made over to the person whom the Magistrate
deems to be entitled to the same:
Provided that no such order shall be made until the expiration of thirty
days from the date of seizing the property, or without hearing the person, if
any, claiming any right thereto, and, the evidence, if any, which he may
produce in support of his claim.
68. Procedure as to perishable property seized under section 62. —
[[Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Forest Officer who made
the seizure under section 62 or any other Forest Officer, may]2,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law, sell]1 any
property seized under section 62 and subject to speedy and natural decay
and may deal with the proceeds as he would have dealt with such property if it had not been sold
[and shall report about every such sale to his official
superior.]3
69. Appeal from orders under sections 65, 66 and 67. —The officer
who made the seizure under section 62 or any of his official superiors or any
person claim ing to be interested in the property so seized may, within thirty
days from the date of any order passed under sections 65, 66 or 67, appeal therefrom to the court to which orders made by such magistrate are
ordinarily appealable, and the order passed on s uch appeal shall be final.
70. Vesting of forfeited property in State Government. —When an
order for the forfeiture of any property has been passed under section 65 or section 67, as the case may be, and the period specified by section 69 for
an appeal from such order has elapsed, and no such appeal has been
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 391
preferred, or when on such an appeal being preferred, the appellate court
confirms such order in respect of the whole or a portion of such property,
such property or such portion thereof, as the case may be, shall vest in the
State Government free from all encumbrances.
71. Saving of power to release property seized. —Nothinghereinbefore
contained shall be deemed to prevent any officer empowered in this behalf
by the State Government from directing at any time the immediate release
of any property seized under section 62, which is not the property of
Government, and the withdrawal of any charge made in respect of such
property.
[71A. Confiscation by Forest Officers in certain cases. —(1) Notwith standing anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter [or
in any other law]2, where a forest offence is believed to have been
committed in respect of timber, [ivory, [gulmavu (machilus marantha) bark,
dalchini bark, Halmaddi (exudation of ailantus malabricum), canes]4,
firewood and charcoal which is the property of the State Government or in respect of sandalwood]
3, the officer seizing the property under sub- section
(1) of section 62 shall, without any unreasonable delay produce it, together with all tools, ropes, chains, boats, vehicles and cattle used in committing
such offence, before an officer authorised by the State Government in this
behalf by notification in the official Gazette, not being below the rank of an
Assistant Conservator of Fores ts (hereinafter referred to as the authorised
officer).
4. Inserted by Act 12 of 1998 w .e.f. 11.5.1998.
(2) Where an authorised officer seizes under sub- section (1) of section
any timber, [ivory, firewood [gulmavu (machilus marantha) bark,
dalchini bark, halmaddi (exudation of ailantus malabricum), canes]2 and
charcoal which is the property of the State Government or any
sandalwood]1, or where any such property is produced before an authorised
officer under sub -section (1) and he is satisfied that a forest offence has
been committed in respect of such property, such authorised officer ma y,
whether or not a prosecution is instituted for the commission of such forest
offence, order confiscation of the property so seized together with all tools,
ropes, chains, boats, vehicles and cattle used in committing such offence.
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 392
[(3) (a ) Where the authorised officer, after passing an order of
confiscation under sub- section (2), is of the opinion that it is expedient in the
public interest so to do, he m ay, order the confiscated property or any part
thereof to be sold by public auction.
(b) Where any confiscated property is sold, as aforesaid, the proceeds
thereof, after deduction of the expenses of any such auction or other
incidental expenses relating thereto, shall where the order of confiscation
made under section 71A is set aside or annulled by an order under sections
71C or 71D, be paid to the owner thereof or to the person from whom it was
seized as may be specified in such order.]1
71B. Issue of show cause notice before confiscation under section
71A. —(1) No order confiscating any timber, sandalwood, charcoal,
firewood, [gulmavu (machilus marantha) bark, dalchini bark, halmaddi
(exudation of ailantus malabricum), canes]1, ivory, tools, ropes, chains,
boats, vehicles or cattle shall be made under section 71A except after notice
in writing to the person from whom it is seized and considering his
objections, if any:
[Provided that no order confiscating a motor vehicle shall be made
except, after giving notice in writing to the registered owner thereof, if in the
opinion of the authorised officer it is practicable to do so, and considering
his objections, if any.]2
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub- section (1), no order
confiscating any tool, rope, chain, boat, vehicle or cattle shall be made under section 71A if the owner of the tool, rope, chain, boat, vehicle or cattle proves to the satisfaction of the authorised officer that it was used in
carrying the timber, sandalwood, charcoal, firewood
[gulmavu (Machilus
marantha) bark, dalchini bark, Halmaddi (exudation of Ailantus malabricum), canes]
or ivory without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself,
his agent, if any, and the person in charge of the tool, rope, chain, boat, vehicle or cattle and that each of them had taken all reasonable and
necessary precautions against such use.
71C. Revision. —Any Forest Officer not below the rank of Conservator of
Forests [specially empowered by the State Government]1 in this behalf by
notification in the official Gazette may, before the expiry of thirty days from
the date of the order of the authorised officer under section 71A, suo motu
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 393
call for and examine the records of that order and may make such inquiry or
cause such inquiry to be made may pass such orders as he deems fit:
Provided that no order pr ejudicial to a person shall be passed under this
section without giving him an opportunity of being heard.
71D. Appeal. —(1) Any person aggrieved by any order passed under
communication to him of such order, appeal to the [Sessions Judge]1
having jurisdiction over the area in which the property to which the order
relates has been seized and the [Sessions Judge]1 shall, after giving an
opportunity to the appellant [and the authorised officer or the officer
specially empowered under section 71C, as the case may be]2 to be heard,
pass such order as he may think fit confirming, modifying or annulling the
order appealed against.
[(2) An order of the Sessions Judge under sub- section (1) shall be final
and shall not be questioned in any court of law.]1
71E. Award of Confiscation not to interfere with other
punishments. —The award of any confiscation [under section 71A or
punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable under this Act.
71F. Property confiscated when to vest in Government. —When an
order for confiscation of any property has been passed under section 71A or
the whole or any portion of such property, such property or portion thereof,
[or if it has been sold under sub- section (3) of section 71A, the sale
proceeds thereof]1 as the case may be, shall vest in the State Government
free from all encumbrances.]1
[71G. Bar of jurisdiction in certain cases. —Whenever any timber,
ivory, [gulmavu (machilus marantha) bark, dalchini bark, halmaddi
(exudation of ailantus malabricum), canes]2, firewood or charcoal belonging
to the State Government or any sandalwood, together with any tool, rope,
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 394
chain, boat, vehicle or cattle used in committing any offence is seized under
sub-section (1) of section 62, the authorised officer under section 71A or the
office r specially empowered under section 71C or the Sessions Judge
hearing an appeal under section 71D shall have and, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act or in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974) or in any ot her law for the time
being in force, any other officer, court, tribunal or authority shall not have,
jurisdiction to make orders with regard to the custody, possession, delivery,
disposal or distribution of such property.]

1. Inserted by Act 1 of 1981 w. e.f. 23.2.1981.
72. Punishment for wrongful seizure. —(1) Any Forest Officer or Police
Officer who vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes any property on pretence
of seizing property liable to forfeiture under this Act shall, on conviction, be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine,
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
(2) Any fine so imposed, or any portion thereof, shall, if the convicting
court so directs, be given as compensation to the person aggrieved by such
seizure.
73. Penalty for counterfeiting or defacing marks on trees or timber
and for altering boundary marks. —Whoever, with intent to cause damage
or injury to the public or to any person, or to caus e wrongful gain as defined
in the Indian Penal Code, —
(a) knowingly counterfeits upon any timber or standing tree a mark used by Forest Officers to indicate that such timber or such tree is the property of the Government or of some person, or that it may lawfully
be cut or removed by some person; or
(b) unlawfully affixes to any timber or standing tree a mark used by Forest Officers; or
(c) alters, defaces or obliterates any such mark placed on any timber or standing tree by or under the authority of a Forest Officer; or
(d) alters, moves, destroys or defaces any boundary mark of any forest or waste land to which the provisions of this Act are applicable;
shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 395
74. Power to arrest without warrant. —(1) Any Forest Officer or Police
Officer may, without orders from a magistrate and without a warrant, arrest
any person reasonably suspected of having been concerned in any forest offence punishable with im prisonment for one month or upwards, if such
person refuses to give his name and residence, or gives a name or residence which there is reason to believe to be false, or if there is reason to
believe that he will abscond.
(2) Any person arrested under this section shall be informed, as soon as
may be, of the grounds for such arrest and shall be produced before the
nearest magistrate having jurisdiction in the case within a period of twenty four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period without the authority of a
magistrate.
75. Power to release on a bond a person arrested. —Any Forest
Officer of a rank not inferior to that of a Forest Ranger, who or whose
subordinate has arrested any person under the provisions of section 74 may release such person on his executing a bond with proper surety to appear, if and when so required, before the magistrate having jurisdi ction in the case,
or before the officer in charge of the nearest police station.
76. Power to prevent commission of offence. —Every Forest Officer
and Police Officer shall prevent, and may interfere for the purpose of
preventing the commission of any fores t offence.
[76A. Prevention of Commission of offences etc.,. - Any forest officer
may if necessary use as much force and do as much injury to persons and
property to prevent the commission of any offence under this Act under Chapter VI of the Wild Life (Pr otection) Act, 1972, or to apprehend any
person who has committed or is engaged in commission of any offence under the said Acts, or for seizure of any weapons, vehicles, cart, boat, any
other conveyance, tools, or any other things used to commit offence under
the said Acts or to carry, transport, conceal or keep the forest produce in
respect of which the offence is committed.]

77. Power to try offences summarily. —The District Magistrate or any
magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf by the State
Government may try summarily under the [Code of Criminal Procedure,
(Central Act 2 of 1974)]1, any forest offence punishable with
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 396
imprisonment, which may extend to six months, or with fi ne which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
78. Operation of other laws not barred. — Nothing in this Act shall be
deemed to prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other law
for any act or omission, which constitutes a forest offence, or from being
liable under such other law to any higher punishment or penalty than that
provided by this Act or the rules made thereunder:
Provided that no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.
79. Power to compound offences. —(1) The State Government may,
[subject to such conditions as may be specified, by notification]1, empower
a Forest Officer, —
(a) to accept from any person against whom a reasonable suspicion
exists that he has committed any forest offence, other than an offence under section 72 or section 73
[or section 86 or section 87]1, a sum of money not
exceeding [fifty thousand rupees]2, by way of composition for the offence
which such person is suspected to have committed;
(b) when any property has been seized as liable to confiscation
[subject to section 71G]1, to release, t he same on payment of the value
thereof [as may be prescribed.]1
(2) On the payment of such sum of money, or such value, or both, as the
case may be, to su ch officer, the suspected person, if in custody, shall be
discharged, the property, if any, seized shall be released, and no further proceedings shall be taken against such person or property.
(3) A Forest Officer shall not be empowered under this section, unless he
is a Forest Officer of rank not inferior to that of a Range Forest Officer.
80. Presumption that forest produce belongs to Government. —
When in any proceedings taken under this Act or in consequence of
anything done under this Act or under any ot her law for the time being in
force, a question arises as to whether any forest produce is the property of
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 397
the State Government, such produce shall be presumed to be the property
of the State Government until the contrary is proved, and in case of any
prosecution the burden of proving the contrary shall lie on the accused.
81. Compensation for damage caused by commission of offence. —
(1) When any person is convicted of felling, cutting, girdling, marking,
lopping or tapping trees, or of injuring them by fire or otherwise in
contravention of this Act or of any rule made thereunder, the convicting
court may, in addition to any other punishment which it may award, order
that person to pay to the State Government such compensation, for each
tree with respect to w hich the offence was committed, as it deems just.
(2) If the person convicted of the offence committed it as the agent or
servant of another person, the convicting court may, unless after hearing
that other person, it is satisfied that the commission of the offence was not a
consequence of his instigation or of any neglect or default on his part, order
him, instead of the person who committed the offence, to pay the
compensation referred to in sub- section (1).
(3) An appeal from any order under sub- section (1) or sub- section (2)
shall lie to the court to which orders made by the convicting court are
ordinarily appealable, and the order passed on such appeal shall be final.
82. Forfeiture of leases. —When the holder of any lease, licence or
contract whatsoever granted or continued by or on behalf of the State
Government for any of the purposes of this Act, or when any such offence is
committed by any agent or servant of the holder of any such lease, licence
or contract, and the State Government is satisfied that the commission of the offence was a consequence of the instigation of such holder or of any
wilful neglect or default on his part, the State Government or a Forest Officer
duly empowered by the State Government in this behalf, may, by order in writing, d eclare the lease, licence, or contract to be forfeited in whole or in
part with effect on and from a date to be specified in the order.
[82A. Criminal liability of licencee for acts of servants. —Where any
offence under this Act or rules made thereunder, i s committed by any
person in the employment and acting on behalf of the holder of a licence or permit granted under this Act, such holder shall also be punishable with a
fine which may extend to rupees fifteen thousand as if he had committed the
said offence unless he establishes that all due and reasonable precautions were exercised by him to prevent the commission of such offence:
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 398
Provided that no person other than the actual offender shall be
punishable with imprisonment except in default or payment of f ine.
82B. Offence by Companies etc. —(1) If the person committing an
offence under this Act is a company, the company as well as every person
in charge of, and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business
at the time of the commission of the o ffence shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- section (1) where an
offence under this section has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with t he consent or connivance
of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the Company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, —
(a) “Company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “Director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.]

CHAPTER X
PROVISIONS RELATING TO SANDALWOOD
[83. Rights of certain persons entitled to sandal trees. - (1) All
persons who by the terms of their sannads, grants, or by judicial decision or
otherwise are, prior to the commencement of this Act, legally entitled to the
sandal trees in their lands shall not fell or sell such sandal tree or convert or
dress sandal wood obtained from suc h tree or possess, store, transport or
sell the sandal wood so obtained except in accordance with the provisions
of the rules made under this Act.
(2) On or after the commencement of the Karnataka Forest
(Amendment) Act, 2001 every occupant or holder of land shall be legally
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 399
entitled to the sandal tree in his land except where such sandal tree is
declared to be the property of the State Government in any grant, lease,
contract or other instrument, but such occupant or holder shall not fell or sell
such sandal tree or convert or dress sandal wood obtained from such tree or
posses, store, transport or sell the sandal wood so obtained except in
accordance with the provisions of the rules made under this Act. ]1
[84. Presumption in case of sandal wood. - Wherein any proceedings
taken under this Act or in consequence of anything done under this Act or under any law for the time being in force, a question arises as to whether
any Sandalwood is the property of the State Government, it shall until the
contrary is proved be presumed to be the property of the State Government
and in case of any prosecution, the burden of proving the contrary shall lie
on the accused.”
]1
[85. Responsibility of occupants and holders of land for the
preservation of sandal trees etc. - Every occupant or holder of land or any
other person referred to in section 83 shall preserve all sandal trees growing
in his land, and shall in the event of its theft, at once, report such fact to the
nearest Forest Officer or Police Officer.]1
86. Penalty for offence in regard to sandalwood. —In any case of a
forest offence having reference to the cutting, uprooting, or removal or
damage to, a sandal tree or any part of a sandal tree belonging to
Government, [or to an occupant or holder of land or other person referred to
in section 83]1, the offender shall, on conviction, be punishable with
imprisonment f or a term which may extend to [ten years]2 [and with fine]3
which may extend to [one lakh rupees.]2
[Provided that, —
(i) in the case of first offence the term of imprisonment shall not be less
than [five years]2 and the amount of fine shall not be less than [fifty
thousand rupees]2; and
(ii) in the case of a second or subsequent offence the term of
imprisonment shall not be less than [seven years]2 and the amount of fine
shall not be less than [seventy five thousand rupees.]2]1
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 400
87. Regulation of sale and manufacture of sandalwood and
sandalwood oil. —(1) No person shall possess, store or sell or attempt to
store or sell sandalwood or disintegrate or attempt to disintegrate
sandalwood in mills or by other contrivance, manufacture or distil, or attempt
to m anufacture or distil oil from sandalwood, or re- distil, [refine, possess,
store or sell or attempt to refine , store or sell]1 oil extracted from
sandalwood, except under a licence obtained from such Forest Officer on
payment of such fees, and subject to such restrictions and conditions as
may be prescribed:
Provided that no such licence shall be refused in respect of distillation of
oil from sandalwood and possession and storage of sandalwood for purposes of distillation, and the sale of sandalwood oil so distilled, by
persons bona fide carrying on the business of distillation immediately prior
to the commencement of this Act, in any area of the State:
Provided further that no such licence shall be necessary for possession
of sandalwood up to
[three kilograms and sandalwood oil upto one hundred
grams]1 for bona fide domestic use.
[Provided also that nothing in this sub- section so far as it relates to
obtaining a licence to possess, store or sell or attempt to store or sell sandal wood shall apply to any person or occupant or holder of land referred to in
such person or occupant or holder in his land.]

2. Inserted by Act 20 of 2001 w .e.f. 5.9.2002.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub- section (1) shall, on
conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to [ten years]1 and with fine which may extend to [one lakh rupees]1:
Provided that, —
(i) in the c ase of first offence, the term of imprisonment shall not be less
than [five years]1 and the amount of fine shall not be less than [fifty
thousand rupees]1;
(ii) in the case of a second or subsequent offence, the term of
imprisonment shall not be less than [seven years]1 and the amount of fine
shall not be less than [seventy five thousand rupees.]1
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 401

CHAPTER XI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS R ELATING TO CATECHU
88. Definitions. —In this Chapter, unless the context oth erwise requires, —
(a) “land” means land belonging to the State Government or private
lands;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Chapter.
89. Felling, etc., of catechu trees without permission prohibited. —
No person shall fell, remove, girdle, mark, lop, tap, uproot or burn or strip,
bark or leaves from or otherwise damage, any catechu tree growing,
existing or found on any land or manufacture cutch unless such person is duly authorised in this behalf under this Chapter.
90. Felling, conversion or removal of catechu trees by the Forest or
Revenue Department or by a person. —The felling, conversion or removal
of catechu trees and timber or manufacture of cutch shall not be effected by any person, other than the following, namely: —
(1) by t he officers of the Forest and Revenue Departments of the State
Government authorised in this behalf by the State Government either by a general or special order; or
(2) by a person holding a permit granted by the
[Deputy Conservator of
Forest]1
[x x x]2.
91. Application for permit for felling catechu trees. —(1) Every person
who, whether as holder, occupant, tenant, sub -tenant or lessee or in any
other capaci ty, having right over catechu trees growing or existing or found
on any land and who is desirous of felling such trees for manufacture of cutch, sale or other purposes, shall apply to the
[Deputy Conservator of
Forest]1 in the prescribed form and obtain a permit:
Provided that no such permit shall be necessary for felling of catechu
trees sold by the Forest Department and manufacture of cutch from such
trees.
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 402
(2) Every permit referred to in sub -section (1) shall be in the prescribed
form.
92. Transport, etc., of catechu trees or timber without permit
prohibited. —No person shall transport or move any catechu trees or timber
unless such trees or timber is accompanied by a permit.
93. Purchase or transport of cutch without permit prohibited. —No
person shall sell or otherwise dispose of any stock of cutch or transport the
same to any place except under a permit granted by the [Deputy
Conservator of Forest]1 or purchase any stock of cutch from any person
other t han the person permitted by the [Deputy Conservator of Forest]1 to
dispose of his stock:
Provided that such permission shall not be necessary for purchase and
transport of cutch up to seven pounds for bona fide domestic use.
94. Manufacture of cutch to be carried on in specified places. — The
boiling of catechu logs, manufacture of cutch and other process for the manufacture of cutch shall be carried on only in such places and within such time as may be specified by the
[Deputy Conservator of Forest]1
95. Maintenance of accounts. —Every person who is permitted to
manufacture cutch or who comes into possession of any stock of cutch exceeding seven pounds shal l maintain regular, true and correct accounts in
prescribed forms and send a return in the prescribed form to the
[Deputy
Conservator of Forest]1 on the first day of every month and shall continue to
send such returns until the entire stock with him is ex hausted.
96. Power of Revenue, Forest and Police Officers to search and
seize property liable to confiscation. — Any Revenue Officer not below
the rank of a Revenue Inspector or any Forest Officer not below the rank of
a Forest Guard or any Police Officer not below the rank of a Head Constable may, within his jurisdiction enter any land and inspect at all reasonable times, stock of cutch, catechu trees felled, boiling of catechu,
accounts maintained and for that purpose enter any premises or stop any
animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance and search the same and seize stocks of catechu trees and cutch together with the packages, coverings
and containers thereof in respect of which he has reason to believ e that any
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 403
of the provisions of this Chapter have been contravened, and the driver and
other person or persons, who may, for the time being in charge of such
animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance, shall stop or secure the
stopping of such animal, vehicle or other conveyance on demand by the said officer and render all assistance within their power in connection with
such search or seizure:
Provided that in exercising the power of entry and search due regard
shall be paid by such officer to the social and religious customs of the
occupants of the premises or vehicle, vessel or other conveyance:
Provided further that if any such premises be found locked up and
unoccupied or unattended by or on behalf of the owner or occupiers, the same may, in the presence of two respectable witnesses, be broken open
and entered upon for any or all of the above purposes.
97. Power to make rules. —(1) The State Government may make rules
for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter.
(2) Without prej udice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules under
this section may be made with respect to all or any of the following matters,
namely: —
(a) the forms of application and permit and their supply;
(b) the form of permit for the transport of catechu trees or timber;
(c) the languages in which the forms of application and permit shall be
printed;
(d) the form in which accounts should be maintained.
98. Penalty. — Whoever contravenes the provisions of sections 89, 90,
91, 92, 93, 94, or 95 shall, on con viction, be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees or with both.
[CHAPTER XI -A
FOREST DEVELOPMENT [FEE]1
1. Substituted by Act, 23 of 2016 w.e.f 16.08.2016
98A. Levy of Forest Development [fee]8.—(1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, in respect of forest produce disposed of by
the State Government [or by a corporation, owned [or controlled by the
State Government ]8 or a body notified by the State Government]2 by sale or
otherwise, there shall be levied and paid to the State Government a [fee]8
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 404
at the rate of [[twelve percent ]3]6 on the amount of consideration paid
therefor.
[[Provided XXX]4]7
[[Provided XXX]5]9
[Provided also that, in respect of minerals which is a forest produce the
rate of Forest Development fee shall be twelve percent. ]10
8. Substituted by Act, 23 of 2016 w.e.f 16.08.2016
9. Omitted by Act, 23 of 2016 w.e.f 23.12.2015.
10. Inser ted by Act, 23 of 2016 w.e.f 16.08.2016
[Explanation: (1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that for the purposes of this sub- section, the words "a body notified by the
State Government" shall mean and include all entities directly or indirectly
engaged in disposing of forest produce found in, or brought from, a forest,
as individuals or other entities including Hindu Undivided Family, Company
or foreign Company, partnership firms, societies, cooperativ e societies,
other bodies corporate, trusts, lease holders of mines and quarries situated in forest area or any other association or committee or person, whether or
not such individuals or entities constituted themselves into a juristic entity
and whether or not such individuals or entities collectively come together
and act as a group or body.
Explanation: (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that for the purpose of this sub- section, the words, "or otherwise" includes
disposal through cap tive consumption.
Explanation: (3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that Forest Development Fee shall be levied on the disposal of the forest
produce irrespective of whether such forest produce is intended for sale
inside or outside the St ate of Karnataka or for the purpose of export or for
captive consumption. ]

1. Inser ted by Act, 23 of 2016 w.e.f 16.08.2016
[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- section (1), no [fee]2
shall be payable to the State Government by a corporation, owned or
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 405
controlled by the State Government to the extent of [fee]2 not levied and
collected by it during the period from fourteenth day of February, 1978, till
the commencement of the Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1988.]1
1. Inserted by Act 10 of 1989 w .e.f. 16.3.1989.
2. Substituted by Act, 23 of 2016 w.e.f 16.08.2016.
[(1-B) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection(1), no fee
shall be levied on the forest produce which is not found in or not brought
from the forest except when it is disposed of by the State Government;
(1-C) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection(1), no Forest
Development Fee on forest produce shall be payable to the State
Government, for which no demand was raised during the period from 16th
August of 2008 till the commencement of the Karnataka Forest
(Amendment) A ct, 2015 (Karnataka Act 41 0f 2015); and
(1-D) The State Government may make rules regarding manner of
Levy, computation and collection of Forest Development fee from a
retrospective date. ]1
1. Inser ted by Act, 23 of 2016 w.e.f 16.08.2016
(2) The said [fee]2 shall be collected along with such consideration.
(3) It is hereby declared that the said [fee]2 shall be in addition to and not
in lieu of any [fee]2 payable in respect of such produce under any other law
in force.
[(4) There shall be levied and collected interest at the rate of eighteen
percent per annum till the date of payment or recovery of all [fee]2 dues.] 1
2. Substi tuted by Act, 23 of 2016 w.e.f 27 .07.2016.
98B. Forest Development Fund. —(1) There shall be constituted for the
State of Karnataka a Fund called the Karnataka Forest Development Fund.
[(2) The following shall form part of the Karnataka Forest Development
Fund, namely: —
(a) the [fee]3 [and interest]2 levied and collected under section 98A;
(b) the money recovered for raising compensatory plantation in lieu of
the forest area made over for non- forestry purposes;
(c) sandal surcharges collected for the development of sandalwood
resources;
(2A) The amounts referred to in sub- section (2) shall first be credited to
the Consolidated Fund of the State and under appropriation duly made by
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 406
law in this behalf, be entered in and transferred to the Karnataka Forest
Development Fund.]1
3. Substi tuted by Act, 23 of 2016 w.e.f 16 .08.2016.
(3) Any amount transferred to the said fund under sub- section (2), shall
be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State.
[(4). The amount at credit of the said fund shall be expended only for one
or more of the following purposes, namely: -
(a) raising of plantations in notified forest areas and such other
purposes as are ancillary thereto namely soil and
moisture conservation works in notified forest areas;
(b) consolidation of the boundaries of notified forest areas;
(c) Acquisition of private areas for the co nsolidation of forests;
(d) construction and maintenance of forest housing in rural areas
for frontline staff;
(e) training, capacity building, research and technology;
(f) sustaining Joint Forest Planning and Management activities
and the Village Forest Committees/ec o development
committees;
(g) rehabilitation and resettlement of people from interior forest
areas;
(h) such other activities relating to Forest development or
management or wild life protection and management as may be notified by the State Government from time to
time
]1]2
[98C. Power of State Government to exempt or reduce Forest
Development fee. - (1) The State Government may, if in its opinion it is
necessary in public interest so to do, by notification and subject to such
restrictions and conditions and for su ch period as may be specified in the
notification, exempt or reduce either prospectively or retrospectively the
forest Development fee payable under this Act, by any specified class of
persons or in respect of any specified forest produce;
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 407
(2) The State Government may, by notification cancel or vary any
notification issued under sub- section (1).
(3) Where any restriction or condition specified under sub- section (1)
is contravened or is not observed by a person or a declaration furnished
under the said sub -section is found to be wrong, then such person shall be
liable to pay by way of penalty an amount equal to twice the difference
between the fee payable at the rates specified by or under the Act and the
fee paid at the rates specified under the notification on the consideration of
such forest produce in respect of which such contravention or nonobservance has taken place or a wrong declaration is furnished:
Provided that before taking action under the sub- section the person
shall be given a reasonable oppor tunity of being heard."
4. For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that, the levy
guidelines shall be deemed to have always been lev ied and collected as
Forest Development Fee.
5. No penal proceedings shall be commenced against any person for
any contravention of the provisions of chapter XIA of the Principal Act that
may arise as a consequence of the retrospective amendments made by this
Act.
6. Validation of Levy and collection of any amount as Forest
Development Tax or Fee. - Notwithstanding anything contained in any
judgment, decree or order of any Court, Tribunal or other authority to the
contrary levy, assessment or collection of any amount as tax or fee on
Forest produce as Forest development Tax or fee made or purporting to have been made and any action or thing taken or done (including any
notices or orders issued or assessment made) and all proceedings held and
any levy and co llection of tax, fee or amount purported to have been
collected by way of tax or fee in relation to such levy assessment or
collection under the provisions of the Principal Act or any rules, notification,
order, guidelines or letters before the commencement of this Act shall be
and shall be deemed to be valid and effective for all purposes as if such
levy, assessment or collection or action or thing had been made, taken or
(a) all acts, proceedings or things done or any action taken by the
Government or as the case may be the Forest Department
officers in connection with the levy, assessment or collection of
any amount as forest Development tax or Forest Development
fee for all purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been made done or taken in accordance with law;
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 408
(b) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in
any Court or Tribunal or before any authority for the refund of
any such tax or fee; and
(c) no Court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of
any such tax or fee. ]1
1. Inser ted by Act, 23 of 2016 w.e.f 27.0 7.2016

CHAPTER XII
MISCELLANEOUS
99. The State Government may invest Forest Officers with certain
powers. —(1) The State Government may, by notification, invest any Forest
Officer with all or any of the following powers, that is to say: —
(a) power to enter upon any land and to survey, demarcate and make
a map of the same;
(b) the powers of civil court to compel the attendance of witnesses and
the production of documents and material objects;
(c) power to issue a search warrant under the [Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (Central Act II of 1974);]1
(d) power to hold inquiries into forest offences, and, in the course of
such inquiry, to receive and record evidence;
(e) power to notify the seasons and manner in which fire may be
kindled, kept or carried in a reserved forest;
(f) power to grant any permission referred to in sections 25 and 50;
(g) power to notify stations for the reception of drift timbers;
(h) power to give public notice of timber collected under section 53;
(i) power to take possession of property under this Act;
(j) power to direct the release of property or withdrawal of charges;
(k) power to stop and check any vehicle suspected to car ry forest
produce.
[(l) power to do any other act which, in the opinion of the State
Government, is conducive to the better protection and security of forest
wealth belonging to the State Government and in particular sandal wood.]1
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 409
(2) Any evidence recorded under clause ( d) of sub -section (1) shall be
admissible in any subsequent trial before a Magistrate:
Provided that it has been taken in the presence of the accused person
and recorded in the manner provided by [section 274 or section 275 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act II of 1974).]1
100. Removal of forest produce from inam lands. —No trees, wood or
timber or other forest produce shall be removed from inam forest lands
without a permit, to be obtained under such rules as may be prescribed,
provided that no fee shall be payable for such permits.
101. Control over reserved trees. —The State Government may by
rules regulate the preservation, reproduction and disposal of sandal trees
and such classes of reserved trees as it deems fit.
[101A. Grant of forest produce on seigniorage rate. —[(1)]1 The State
Government may grant to any person, any tree, wood or timber or other
forest produce in any district or reserve forest on payment by such person, such seigniorage value as may
[x x x]2, subject to general or special orders
of the State Government, [be fixed]3 by the Chief Conservator of Forests.]1
[Provided that no seigniorage value shall be payable in respect of bark
for the period from the Nineteenth day of February, 1981 to the Thirty -first
day of August, 1983:
Provided further that the State Government may, for a period of ten years
from the First day of October, 1983, and on payment of fifty per cent of such
seign iorage value, grant to any person eucalyptus or bamboos for the
manufacture of news print.]1
[(2) The holder of a lease or agreement or any other document granted
or entered into prior to the commencement o f the Karnataka Forest
(Amendment) Act, 1980 and providing for supply of any tree, wood, timber
or other forest produce by the State Government shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in the instrument of lease or agreement or other
document or in any la w in force at such commencement, pay, in respect of
such tree, wood, timber or other forest produce received by him after such
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 410
commencement, value (by whatever name called) at the rate for the time
being specified in the rules made or orders issued under s ub-section (1), in
respect of such tree, wood, timber or other forest produce.
(3) The holder of any such lease, agreement or document, granted or
entered into after the commencement of the Karnataka Forest (Amendment)
Act, 1980 notwith- standing anything c ontained in such lease, agreement or
document shall, pay, in respect of any tree, wood, timber or other forest
produce received by him, value (by whatever name called) at the rate for the
time being specified in the rules made or orders issued under sub- section
(1), in respect of such tree, wood, timber or other forest produce.
(4) The rates specified in the rules made or orders issued under subsection (1), may be modified from time to time by the Chief Conservator of
Forests:
Provided that the Chief Conse rvator of Forests shall not enhance the rate
or value in respect of any tree, wood, timber or other forest produce more
than once during any period of two years.]1
[101B. Supply of forest produce under agreement by the State
Government. —(1) No lease, agreement or any other document entered into
by the State Government and providing for supply of fire- wood, timber or
other forest produce by the State Government shall, at a time, be for a term
exceeding five years and the supply under every such lease, agreement or
other document shall be subject to the condition of availability of such tree, wood, timber or other forest produce.
(2) Any lease or agreement or any other document providing for the
supply of tree, wood, timber or other forest produce by the State
Government, granted or entered into prior to the commencement of the
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1984, —
(a) for a term exceeding five years and in force on the date of such
commencement, shall cease t o be in force on the expiry of the term
specified therein or the period of five years from the date of such
commencement, whichever is earlier;
(b) shall be and shall be deemed to be subject to the condition of
availability of such tree, wood, timber or ot her forest produce.]

1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 411
102. General powers to make rules. —(1) The State Government may
by notification, make rules to carry out all or any of the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, rules may be made, —
(a) to prescribe and limit the powers and duties of any Forest Officer
under this Act;
(b) to regulate the procedure of Forest Settlement Officers;
(c) for the preservation, reproduction and dis posal of trees, timber and
other forest produce belonging to Government, but grown on lands
belonging to or in the occupation of private persons;
(d) to regulate the rewards to be paid to officers and informers out of
the proceeds of fines and confiscation under this Act or otherwise.
[(e) to regulate the cutting, felling, sale or disposal of blackwood or
bite tree (Dalbergia Latifolia);
(f) to prescribe the fees to be levied in respect of licences, permits,
passes or permissions issued under this Act or r ules made thereunder;
(g) in respect of any other matter which is required or allowed by this
Act to be prescribed]1;
103. Rules to be laid before State Legislature. —Every rule made
under t his Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions,
and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session
immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
104. Penalties for Contravention of Act or rules. —Any person
contravening any prov ision of this Act or any rule made under this Act, for
the contravention of which no special penalty is provided, shall, on
conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
[six months]1 or with fine which may extend to [one thousand rupees]1, or
with both:
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 412
[Provided that any person contravening any such provision relating to
sandalwood, shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees.]2
[104A. Restrictions on trade and transport of blackwood or Bite
trees and timber thereof. —(1) No person other than, —
(a) the State Government; o r
(b) the officers of the State Government not below the rank of a
[Deputy Conservator of Forest]2, authorised in writing in this behalf,
shall purchase or transport any blackwood or bite tree (Dalbergia Latifolia)
or timber thereof:
Provided that the purchase of any such tree or timber from the State
Government or the aforesaid officers shall not be deemed to be a purchase in contravention of the provisions of this sub -section:
Provided further that the State Government may by order exempt any
such tree or timber below such measurements as may be specified by it
from time to time from the provisions of sub -section (1).
(2) No person sh all sell or otherwise dispose of any such tree or timber to
any person other than the State Government or the aforesaid officers.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- section (1) any such tree
or timber purchased from the State Government or the a foresaid officers by
any person for bonafide personal use may be transported by such person in
accordance with the terms and conditions of a permit issued by such
authority and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The price of any such tree or timber s hall be such as the State
Government may by order specify from time to time, having regard to, —
(a) prevalent market price;
(b) quality of the timber in the locality;
(c) transport facilities available in the locality;
(d) the cost of transport;
(e) general level of wages for labour prevalent in the locality; and
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 413
(f) such other matters as may be prescribed.
(5) The State Government or the aforesaid officers may establish such
number of depots as may be necessary where any such tree or timber may
be sold to the State Government or the aforesaid officers.
(6) The State Government or the aforesaid officers subject to the general
supervision and control of the State Government shall be bound to purchase
at the price fixed under sub- section (4) any such tree or t imber offered for
sale during the hours of business.
(7) Any tree or timber purchased under sub- section (1) shall be sold or
otherwise disposed of in such manner as the State Government may from
time to time direct.
(8) Any person contravening the provisions of this section or any rule
made thereunder shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to [five years]1 and with fine which may extend to
[ten thousand rupees.]1
104B. Certain offences to be cognizable. —All offences under Chapter
X and under section 104A and rules made thereunder shall be cognizable.]3
[104C. Abetment. —Any person including, subject to section 114, any
Forest Officer, who abets the Commission of any offence punishable by or
under this Act or the commission of an act which would be an offence if committed by a person capable by law of committing an offence with the
same intention or knowledge as that of the abetter, shall be deemed to have
committed such offence and shall be punishable with the punishment
provided for such offence.
104D. Special provision regarding bail. —Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (Central Act 2 of 1974)
no person accused of a forest o ffence, punishable under sections 86 or 87
or 104A or in respect of ivory, shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on
his own bond unless, —
(a) the prosecution has been given an opportunity to oppose the
application for such release, and
(b) where the prosecution opposes the application, the court is satisfied
that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such
offence.
[104E. x x x]2
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 414
104F. Persons not be released on probation. — Notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2
of 1974) and the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (Central Act 20 of 1958),
no person convicted of an offence punishable under sections 86, 87, or 104A, shall be released on probation or admonition.
104G. Removal of persons convicted of certain offences. —(1) When
any person having been previously convicted twice or more of an offence
punishable under sections 86, 87 or 104 A is again convicted of an offence
punishable under any of the said sections, the court may, if it thinks fit, at
the time of passing the sentence on such person, also, by order, direct such
person to remove himself after the expiry of such sentence outside any
district or any other area specified in such order.
(2) The order under sub- section (1) , shall specify the period not
exceeding two years during which such order shall remain in force and shall specify such conditions and restrictions as may be specified in the rules, by
the State Government.
(3) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such order shall
become void.
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an appellate court
or by the High Court when exercising its powers of revision.
(5) If a person to whom a direction is issued under this section to remove
himself from any area, —
(i) fails to remove himself as directed; or
(ii) having so removed himself, except with the permission in writing
of the court mentioned in sub- section (1), enters the area within
the period specified in the order,
the court may cause hi m to be arrested and removed in police custody to
such place outside the area as the court may, in each case, specify.
(6) Any person who is guilty of the breach of any order passed under this
section or of any of the conditions or restrictions specified i n such order,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine, or with both.]

105. Persons bound to assist Forest Officers and Police Officers. —
(1) Every person who exercises any right in a reserved forest or protected
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 415
forest or district forest or who is permitted to take any forest produce from,
or to cut and remove timber or to pasture cattle i n any forest, and every
person who is employed by any such person in such forest, and every person in any village contiguous to such forest who is employed by the Government or who receives emoluments from the Government for services
to be performed to the community, shall be bound to furnish without
unnecessary delay to the nearest Forest Officer or Police Officer any
information he may possess respecting the occurrence of fire in or near
such forest or the commission of, or intention to commit, any forest offence,
and shall forthwith take steps, whether so required by any Forest Officer or
Police Officer or not, —
(a) to extinguish any forest fire in such forest of which he has knowledge or information;
(b) to prevent by any lawful means in his power any fire in the vicinity
of such forest of which he has knowledge or information from
spreading to such forest;
and shall assist any Forest Officer or Police Officer demanding his aid, —
(c) in preventing the commission in such forest of any forest offence; and
(d) when there is reason to believe that any such offence has been
committed, in such forest, in discovering and arresting the offender.
(2) Any person, who, being bound so to do, without lawful excuse (the
burden of proving which shall lie upon such pers on) fails, —
(a) to furnish without unnecessary delay to the nearest Forest Officer
or Police Officer any information required by sub- section (1);
(b) to take steps as required by sub- section (1) to extinguish any forest
fire in a reserved forest or protected forest or district forest;
(c) to prevent as required by sub- section (1) any fire in the vicinity of
such forest from spreading to such forest; or
(d) to assist any Forest Officer or Police Officer demanding his aid in preventing the commission in s uch forest of any forest offence, or,
when there is reason to believe that any such offence has been
committed in such forest in discovering and arresting the offender;
shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees,
or with both.
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 416
106. Management of forests which are the joint property of State
Government and other persons. —(1) If the State Government and any
person be jointly interested in any forest or was te land, or in the whole or
any part of the produce thereof, the State Government may either, —
(a) undertake the management of such forest, waste land or produce,
accounting to such person for his interest in the same; or
(b) issue such regulations for the management of the forest, waste
land or produce by the person so jointly interested as it deems necessary for
the management thereof and the interests of all parties therein.
(2) When the State Government undertakes under clause ( a) of subsection (1) the management of any forest, waste land or produce, it may, by
notification, declare that any of the provisions contained in Chapters II and
IV shall apply to such forest, waste land or produce, and thereupon such provisions shall apply accordingly.
107. Pow er of State Government to apply provisions of this Act to
certain lands of State Government or local authority. —The State
Government may, by notification, declare that any of the provisions of this Act, shall apply to all or any lands on the banks of canal s or the sides of
roads which are the property of the State Government or a local authority
and thereupon such provisions shall apply to such lands accordingly.
108. Failure to perform service for which a share in produce of
Government forest is enjoyed. —(1) If any person is entitled to a share in
the produce of any forest which is the property of the State Government or
over which the State Government has proprietary rights or to any part of the
forest produce of which the State Government is entitled, upon the
conditions of duly performing any service connected with such forest, such
share shall be liable to confiscation in the event of the fact being established
to the satisfaction of the State Government that such service is no longer so
performed:
Provi ded that no such share shall be confiscated until the person entitled
thereto, and the evidence, if any, which he may produce in proof of the due
performance of such service, have been heard by an officer duly appointed
in that behalf by the State Government.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the confiscation of his share under subsection (1) may within sixty days from the date of receipt of the order of the
State Government, appeal to the High Court.
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 417
109. Recovery of money due to Government. — [(1)]1 All money
payable to the State Government under this Act, or under any rule made
under this Act, or on account of the price of any forest produce, or of
expenses incurred in the execution of this Act in respect of such produce, may, if not paid when due, be recovered as if it were an arrear of land
revenue.
[(2) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub- section (1) or in any
other law for the time being in force, on an application made by a Forest Officer, for the recovery of arrears of any sum due by any person towards
lease, rent, forest development tax, royalty, price of any forest produce or
any other sum due under this Act, or any rule, order or notification made or
issued thereunder, the Conservator of Forest may after making an enquiry
and giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such person, decide
the sum due, and issue a certificate for recovery of the said sum.
(3) An order made under sub- section (2), shall be binding on the person
against whom it is made and shall, if not carried out, on a certificate signed
by the Conservator of Forest, be deemed to be a decree of Civil Court, and shall be executed in the same manner as a decree of such Court.]

110. Lien on forest produce for such money. —(1) When any money
referred to in section 109 is payable for or in respect of any forest produce, the amount thereof shall be deemed to be a first charge on such produce, and such produce may be taken possession o f by a Forest Officer duly
empowered in this behalf and may be retained by him until such amount has been paid.
(2) If such amount is not paid when due, the Forest Officer may sell such
produce by public auction and the proceeds of sale shall be applied fi rst in
discharging such amount.
(3) The surplus, if any, if not claimed within sixty days from the date of
sale by the person entitled thereto, shall be forfeited to the State
Government.
111. Land required under this Act to be deemed to be needed for a
public purpose under the Land Acquisition Act. —Whenever it appears
to the State Government that any land is required for any of the purposes of
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 418
this Act, such land shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose within
the meaning of section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
112. Recovery of penalties due under bond. —(1) When any person, in
accordance with any provision of this Act, or in compliance with any rule
made thereunder binds himself by any bond or instrument to perform any
duty or act, or covenants by any bond or instrument that he, or that he and
his servants and agents will abstain from any act, the whole sum mentioned
in such bond or instrument as the amount to be paid in case of a
contravention of the conditions thereof may, notwithstanding anything in
of such contravention as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
(2) If any question arises, —
(a) whether there has been a contravention of any of the conditions of
such bond or instrument;
(b) as to the sum to be paid for such contravention;
(c) as to the person or persons liable to pay such sum;
the question shall be referred to and (after giving notice to the person
concerned and after considering his objections, if any) be decided by an officer not below the rank of a
[Deputy Conservator of Forest]1 authorised
by the State Government in this behalf. The person aggrieved by the decision of such officer may, within a period of sixty days from the date of such decision, appeal to the State Government or such other appellate
authority as the State Government may by notification, appoint in this behalf. The decision of such officer, subject to an appeal to the appellate authority,
and the decision of the appellate authorit y on such appeal, shall be final.
113. Forest Officers deemed to be public servants. —All Forest
Officers shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section
of the Indian Penal Code.
114. Indemnity for acts done in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or
other legal proceeding shall lie against any Forest Officer for anything done
or omitted to be done by him in good faith under this Act or the rules or
orders made thereunder.
[114A. Suits or prosecution in respect of acts done under colour of
duty not to be entertained without sanction of the State Government. -
(1) In any case of alleged offence or of wrong alleged to have been
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 419
committed by any Forest Officer, by any act done under colour or in excess
of any such duty or authority under this Act, or wherein it shall appear to the
court that offence if committed was of the character aforesaid, the prosecution or suit shall not be entertained except with the previous
sanction of the State Gover nment.
(2) In the case of an intended suit on account of such wrong as
aforesaid, the person intending to sue shall be bound to give to the alleged
wrongdoer one month's notice atleast of the intended suit with sufficient
description of the wrong complained of, failing which such suit shall be
dismissed.
(3) The plaint shall set forth that a notice as aforesaid has been served
on the defendant and the date of such service, and shall state whether any,
and if so, what tender of amends has been made by the de fendant. A copy
of the said notice shall be annexed to the plaint endorsed with a declaration
by the plaintiff of the time and manner of service thereof.]

115. Forest Officer not to trade. — (1) No Forest Of ficer shall, as
principal or agent or in any other capacity, trade in timber or other forest
produce, or be or become interested in any lease or mortgage of any forest,
or in any contract for working any forest whether within or outside the [State
of Karn ataka]1.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub- section (1) shall on
conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years or with fine or w ith both.
116. Central Act No. 67 of 1957 to prevail. —Nothing in this Act shall be
deemed to affect the operation of the Minerals (Regulation and
Development) Act, 1957 (Central Act 67 of 1957) and the rules, made
thereunder, and the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of the provisions of the said Mines and Minerals (Regulation and
Development) Act, 1957.
117. Repeal and savings. —The Indian Forest Act, 1927 (Central Act
XVI of 1927), as in force in the [Belgaum Area]1, the Indian Forest Act, 1927
(Central Act XVI of 1927), as in force in the Coorg District, the Hyderabad
Forest Act, 1355 Fasli (Hyderabad Act II of 1355 Fasli), as in force in the
[Gulbarga Area]1, the Madras Forest Act, 1882 (Madras Act V of 1882), as
in force in the [Mangalore and Kollegal Area]1, the Mysore Forest Act, 1900
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 420
(Mysore Act X of 1900), as in force in the Mysore Area, and the
[Karnataka]1 Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1962 ([Karnataka]1 Act
No. 19 of 1962), are hereby repealed:
Provided that the repeal shall not affect, —
(a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or anything duly done
or suffered thereunder, or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any law so repealed, or
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any
offence committed against any law so repealed, or
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such
right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punish ment as
aforesaid;
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy, may be instituted,
continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed:
Provided further that, subject to the preceding proviso, anything done or
any action taken (including any appointment or delegation made,
notification, order, instruction or direction issued, rule, regulation, form, or
scheme framed, certificate obtained, permit or licence granted or registration
effected) under any such law shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provision of this Act and shall continue to be in
force accordingly, unless and until superseded by anything done or any
action taken under this Act.
118. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving
effect to the provisions of this Act in consequence of the transition to the said provisions from the provisions of the Acts in force immediately before
the commencement of this Act, the State Government may, by notification,
make such provisions as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
* * * *
NOTIFICATIONS
I
Bangalore, dated 1st March, 1969. [No. AFD 2 FAD 69.]
1964: KAR. ACT 5] Forest 421
S.O. 491. —In exercise of the powers conferred by sub- section (3) of
Government of Mysore hereby appoints the 1st June 1969 as the date on
which the said Act shal l come into force.
By Order and in the name of the Governor of Mysore,
(S. BALASUBRAMANYAN )
Under Secretary.
(Published in the Karnataka Gazette Part IV —2-C (ii) dated 13 -3-1969.)
II
Bangalore, dated 4th September, 1974. [No. AFD 130 FDP 74 (I).]
G.S.R. 25 6.—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub- section (2) of
No. 23 of 1974), the Government of Karnataka hereby appoints the 16th day
of September 1974 as the date on which the said A ct shall come into force.
By Order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka,
(S. SHYAM SUNDER )
Special Officer and Ex -Officio Deputy Secretary to
Government, Agriculture and Forest Department.
(Published in the Karnataka Gazette Part IV —2-C (ii) dated 12th
September 1974 at page 963.)
III
Forest, Environment and Ecology Secretariat
Notification
No. FEE 16 FSW 2001, Bangalore,
Dated 5th September, 2002
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub- section (2) of Section 1 of
the Karnataka Forest (Amendm ent) Act, 2001 (Karnataka Act, 20 of 2001),
the Government of Karnataka hereby appoints the 5th September 2002 to
be the day on which the said Act shall come into force.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka,
K.V. Jayalakshmi
Under Secre tary to Government,
Forest, Environment and Ecology Department.
* * * *
Forest [1964: KAR. ACT 5 422

KARNATAKA ACT NO 41 OF 2015
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra- ordinary on the
Twenty third day of December 2015)
THE KARNATAKA FOREST (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2015
(Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty first day of December 2015)
An Act further to amend the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Forest Act,
(Karnataka Act 5 of 1964), for the purposes hereinafter appearing;
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty sixth
year of the Republic of India as follows: -
1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come in to force at once.

KARNATAKA ACT NO 23 OF 2016
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the Twenty
Seventh day of July, 2016)

THE KARNATAKA FOREST (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2016
(Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty Sixth day of July, 2016)

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Forest Act,
(Karnataka Act 5 of 1964), for the purposes hereinafter appearing;
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the sixty -
seventh year of the Republic of India as follows: -
1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force at once.