An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the levy of tax on motor vehicles in
the [State of Karnataka]1.
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to the levy of tax on
motor vehicles in the [State of Karnataka]1;
BE it enacted by the [Karnataka]1 State Legislature in the Eighth Year of the Republic of
India as follows: —
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement. - (1) This Ac t may be called the [Karnataka]1
Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.
(2) It extends to the whole of the [State of Karnataka]1.
(3) It shall come into force on such [date]1 as the State Government may, by notification,
appoint.
1. The Act has come into force on 1.1.1958 by notification. Text of the notification is at the end of the Act.
2. Def initions. - (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
[(a) ‘Classic car’ means a motor car manufactured during the period between the year
and 1949 and registered [x x x]1 under Section 39 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
(Central Act 59 of 1988);]2
1. omitted by Act 12 of 1983 w.e.f 1.4.1993
2. Inserted by Act 10 of 1991w.e.f 1.4.1991.
[(aa)]2 “fleet owner” means a person who is the registered owner of a fleet of [five hundred
or more public service vehicles]1;
[Explanation: - For the purpose of this clause, State Transport Undertaking shall be
deemed to be a fleet owner in respect of vehicles placed at the disposal and under the
control of such undertaking by the registered owner under any arrangement entered into
between such owner and the undertaing for the use of such vehicles by the undertaking to
operate on any route as stage carriage under any permit issued therefore to such

undertaking under sub -section (1) of section 103 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central
Act 59 of 1988)]3
3. Inserted by Act 23 of 2001 w.e.f 25 .8.2001.
[(b) “taxation authority” means, —
(i) in the case of a fleet owner, the Commissioner for Transport or any other officer
appointed by the State Government in this behalf; and
(ii) in other cases, such officer as may be appointed by the State Go vernment to
exercise the powers and perform the functions of the taxation authority under this Act;]1
1. Substituted by Act 38 of 1976 w.e.f 1.1.1977 by notification. Text of notification is at the end of the Act.
(c) “local authority” includes a cant onment authority within the meaning of the
Cantonments Act, 1924 (Central Act II of 1924);
(d) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
[(ee) “private service vehicle” means an omnibus constructed or adapted to carry more
than nine persons (excluding the driver) and used by or on behalf of the owner of such
vehicle for the purpose of carrying persons for or in connection with his trade or business or
otherwise than for hire or reward;]1
1.Inserted by Act 28 of 1984 w.e.f 5.5.1984.
(f) “registered owner” means the person in whose name a motor vehicle is registered
under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (Central Act IV of 1939);
(g) “Schedule” means a Schedule ann exed to this Act;
[(h) “taxation card” means a taxation card issued under section 5 and includes a fresh
taxation card issued in place of the original taxation card under sub -section (2) of section 6;]1
1. Substituted by Act 38 of 1976 w.e.f 1.1.1977 by notification. Text of notification is at the end of the Act.
[(hh) ‘Vintage Car’ means a motor car manufactured during the year 1939 and earlier and
duly registered [x x x]1 under Section 39 of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of
1988).]2
1. Omitted by Act 12 of 1993 w.e.f 1.4.1993.
2. Inserted by Act 10 of 1991 w.e.f 1.4.1991
[(i) “year” means , —
(i) in relation to a fleet owner, the financial year; and
(ii) in other cases, a period of twelve calendar months commencing from the first day
of the month in which the motor vehicle concerned is registered or a new registration mark is
assigned to it under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (Central Act IV of 1939); ‘half year’ means
the first six months or the second six months of such year or th e said period of twelve
calender months; and ‘quarter’ means the first three months or the second three months of
the half -year;]1
1.Substituted by Act 38 of 1976 w.e.f 1.1.1977.
(j) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act, shall have the meanings
assigned to them in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (Central Act IV of 1939).
(2) The [Karnataka]1 General Clauses Act, 1899, ([Karnataka]1 Act III of 1899) shall
apply for the interpretation of this Act, as it applies for the interpretation of a [Karnataka
Act]1.

CHAPTER - II
TAXATION
3. Levy of tax. - (1) A tax at the rates specified in Part A of the Schedule shall be levied
on all motor vehicles suitable for use on roads [x x x]1:
[Proviso x x x]1
[Provided that in the case of a motor cycle (including motor scooter and cycle with
attachment for propelling the same by mechanical power) [other than those owned by
Central Government employees or Defence Personnel]3 [or employees of public sector
undertakings owned by Government of India including nationalised banks ]4 [which are
brought with them to the State of Karnataka on transfer for which lifetime tax, or tax quarterly
or annually, as the case may be, has alre ady been paid in other states or union territories]6
the tax shall be levied at the rates specified in part [A1]5 of the schedule:]2
1. Omitted by Act 38 of 1976 w.e.f 1.7.1976 by notification. Text of the notification is at the end of the Act.
3. Inserted by Act 8 of 1997 w.e.f 1.4.1997.
[Provided further that in the ca se of tractors, trailers and power tiller trailers, —
(a) owned by agriculturists and whose main source of income is from agriculture;
(b) owned by agricultural co -operative societies including Vyavasaya Seva Sahakari
Sangha Niyamitha, Raitha Seva Sahakar i Sangha Niyamitha, Sericulture -cumFarmers Co -operative Societies, Large Sized Co -operative Societies, Co -operative
Agricultural Banks, Small sized Co -operative Societies, Agricultural Credit Societies,
Multipurpose Co -operative Credit Societies, Doddapra manada Prathamika Patthina
Sahakari Sangha, Primary Co -operative Agriculture and Rural Development Bank
and Services Co -operative Societies; and
(c) not falling under clauses ( a) and ( b) above but used exclusively for carrying out such
agricultural operat ions as may be prescribed,
the tax shall be levied at the rates specified in Part - [A2]2 of the schedule:]1
[Provided also that in case of Vintage -car and Classic car, the tax shall be levied at the
rates specified in Part [A3]2 of the schedule:]1
[Provided also that: —
[(a) In case of three wheelers includin g autorickshaws used for transportation of
goods not exceeding [1500 kgs.]3 in weight laden and vehicles permitted to carry three
passengers (excluding driver) either used for hire or reward or not, the tax shall be levied at
the rates specified in Part ‘ A4’ of the schedule.
[(aa) In case of goods vehicles having gross vehicle weight exceeding 1,500 kgs but
not exceeding [[[12,000 kgs]10]12]13 Kgs in weight laden, whether used for hire or reward
or not, tax shall be levied at the rates specified in Part A6 of the Schedule]4
[(b) in case of motor cars including jeeps (other than those [owned by companies.
Central Government employees or defence personnel]6 [or employees of public sector
undertakings owned by Government of India including nationalis ed banks ]7 [which are
brought with them to the State of Karnataka on transfer for which lifetime tax, or tax quarterly
or annually, as the case may be, has already been paid in other states or union territories]11
and omni buses and private service vehi cles having floor area not exceeding [five square
meters]8, tax shall be levied at the rates specified in part A5 of the Schedule.]5]2]1
[X X X]9

4. Inserted by Act 8 of 2007 w.e.f 1.4.2007.
12. Substituted by the Karnatak a Motor Vehicles Taxation (Power to remove difficulties) Order, 2023. Issued

[Explanation -1]2.—A motor vehicle of which the certificate of registration is current shall,
for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be a vehicle suitable for use on roads.
[Explanation -2.- In respect of motor vehicles registered outside the State of Karnataka
and which are in the State for a period exceeding thirty days, notwithstanding anything
contained in the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988), and in
any order or direction contained in any judgment or order of any Court, tax shall be levied as
specified in [Parts A1, A2, A2(a), A4, A5, A5(a), A6, A7, A8, A8(a), A9 and A10 ]3 as the
case may be ;]2
[Note. — For the purpose of the above Explanation the certificate of registration shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in section 38 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, be
deemed to be current even if the certificate of fitness is not effective provided such certificate
of fitness has not been cancelled.]1
[[ (c) In case of Construction Equipment Vehicles (as defined in clause (cab) of rule 2 of
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989) and vehicles fitted with air compressor and
generator, tax shall be levied at the rates specified in Part - A7 of the schedule . ]1]2

[(d) in the case of Motor Cabs [[[ [XXX]6 ]5]4]2, [other than those registered outside
the State and covered with a permit iss ued under sub -section (9) of section 88 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988) ]3 tax shall be levied at the rates specified in
Part-A8 of the schedule.]1
4. Substituted by the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Power to remove difficulties) Order,

[(e) In case of Combined Harvester Vehicles (as defined in clause (cb) of rule 2 of
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989) tax shall be levied at the rates specified in Part -A9
of the Schedule.]1
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) [or section 4]1, taxes at the
rates specified in Part B of the Schedule shall be levied on motor vehicles [suitable for use
on roads, which are in the State]2 for periods shorter than a quarter, but not exceeding thirty
days.
(3) In the case of motor vehicl es in respect of which any reciprocal arrangement relating
to taxation has been entered into between the [ Government of Karnataka]1 and any other
State Government, the levy of tax shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, be in
accordance wi th the terms and conditions of such reciprocal arrangement:
Provided that the tax leviable under any such arrangement shall not exceed the tax
leviable under the Schedule:
Provided further that the terms and conditions of every such reciprocal arrangement shall
be published in the Official Gazette, and a copy thereof shall be laid before the State
Legislative Assembly.
[4. X X X ]1
[(5) Not withstanding anything contained in sub -sections of (1) to (4), a tax at the rate
specified in Part ‘E’ of the Schedule shall be levied on all motor vehicles including chassis,
requiring temporary registration.]1
[3A. Levy of cess. - [(1) There shall be levied and collected by way of cess, at the rate
of eleven percentum of the tax levied under section 3 on the Motor Vehicles registered
under Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 5 9 of 1988) out of which ten percentum shall be
for the purpose of various infrastructure projects across the State, equity in investment in
Bangalore Mass Rapid Transit Limited, the Mukhya Manthri Grameena Rasthe Abhivruddhi
Nidhi, in the proportion of 57: 28:15 respectively and one percentum for the purpose of
Urban Transport Fund. ]1
[(1A) In addition to the existing cess of the tax levied under Section 3 on the Motor
Vehicles registered under the Motor Vehicles Act,1988 (Central Act 59 0f 1988), 3%
additional cess shall be levied and collected on the transport vehicles for the purpose of the
Karnataka Motor Transport and Other Allied Workers Social Security and Welfare Fund. ]2
[(1B) In Addition to the existing cess of the tax levied under section 3 on the Motor
Vehicles registered under the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of
1988), additional cess of Rupees Five Hundred for two wheeler and Rupees One Thousand
for Motor Cars shall be levied and collected on the non -transport v ehicles at the time of
registration for the purpose of the Karnataka Motor Transport and other Allied Workers
Social Security and Welfare Fund.

Explanation: For the purpose of this sub -section ‘non -transport vehicles’ means as
specified by a Notification by the Central Government under the provisions of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988.]3

(2) The cess levied under sub -section (1) shall be in addition to any tax levied under
(3) The provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder including those relating to
refund or exemption from tax shall, so far as may be, apply in relatio n to the levy,
assessment and collection of the cess payable under sub -section (1), as they apply in
relation to the levy, assessment and collection of motor vehicles tax under this Act.
[Explanation. - x x x]2]1
[3B and 3C. x x x]1
[3B. Levy of Green Tax. - (1) There shall be levi ed and collected a cess called "green
tax" in addition to the tax levied under this Act on the motor vehicles suitable for use on road
as specified in column (2) of the table below at the rates specified in column (3) thereof for
the purpose of implementa tion of various measures to control air pollution.
TABLE
Sl.
No. Class and age of the vehicle Rate of cess in
rupees
2 3

Non-transport vehicle completed 15 years from the
date of its registration, at the time of renewal of
certificate of registrat ion as per sub -section (10), of
(a) Two wheelers
(b) Other than two wheelers

250-00
500-00
Transport vehicle completed 7 years from the date of
its registration, at the time of renewal of fitness
certif icate as per section 56, of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988, - 200-00 per
annum
(2) The provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder excluding those relating to
refund of tax shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy, assessment and colle ction
of the cess payable under sub -section (1), as they apply in relation to the levy, assessment
and collection of motor vehicles tax under this Act.]

4. Payment of tax. - (1) The tax levied under section 3 s hall be paid in advance by the
registered owner or person having possession or control of the motor vehicle, for a quarter,
half-year or year, at his choice, [within [[a month ]2]3 from the commencement of such
quarter, half -year, or year as the case may be]1:
[Provided that the tax in respect of vehicle to be paid quarterly amounting to Rupees
thirty thousand and above may be paid monthly on prorata basis before the expiry of validity
of tax and subject to such condition as may be specified by the Government from time to
time.]1
[[Provided further that]3 the tax in respect of vehicles specified in item 1 and 14(2) of
Part A of the Schedule shall be paid annually subject to such conditions as may be specified
by the Government from time to time:]1

[Proviso x x x]1
[Provided also that not withstanding anything in this sub -section such tax may be paid in
advance in a lumpsum by such owner or person at his choice, for a period of five years or
ten years within fifteen days from the commencement of the first year of such period of five
years o r ten years:]1
[Provided also that in case of three wheelers including auto rickshaws used for
transportation of goods not exceeding 1500 kgs. in weight laden and vehicles permitted to
carry three passengers (excluding driver) either for hire or reward or not, motor cycle
(including motor scooter and cycle with attachment for propelling the same by mechanical
power) and motor cars including jeeps, (other than those owned by the Central Government
Employees, De fence personnel or employees of public sector undertakings owned by
Government of India including nationalised banks which are brought with them to the State
of Karnataka on transfer for which lifetime tax, or tax quarterly or annually, as the case may
be, has already been paid in other states or [Union territories, ]2 omni buses and private
service vehicles having floor area not exceeding five square meters [and motor cabs
[[[[XXX] 3]4]5]6]7 specified in the fourth proviso to sub -section (1) of sect ion 3 in respect of
which tax is already paid prior to the first day of April, 1997 or prior to the date of
commencement of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Second Amendment) Act, 2011
as the case may be , the tax specified in the first proviso or in the fourth proviso to sub section (1) of section 3 as the case may be shall be levied after the expiry of the period for
which tax is paid under sub -section (1) and the tax shall be paid within one month from the
date of expiry of the said period. ]1

5. Substituted by the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Power to remove
difficulties) Order, 2023. Issued vide order No. TD 03 TDR 2023/Part -1,Dated:

[Provided further that in case of goods vehicles having gros s vehicle weight
exceeding 1,500 kgs but not exceeding [[12,000 kgs ]2]3 in weight laden, in respect of which
tax is already paid prior to [[1st day of January , 2024]2]3, the tax specified in clause (aa) to
the fourth proviso to sub -section (1) of Secti on 3, shall be levied after the expiry of the period
for which the tax is paid under sub -section (1) and such tax shall be paid within one month
from the date of commencement of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment)
Act, 2007.]1
2. Substituted by the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Power to remove difficulties) Order,
[Prov ided further that in case of Vintage car and Classic car specified in third proviso to
sub-section (1) of Section 3, in respect of which tax is already paid prior to 1st day of April,
1991, the tax specified in the third proviso to sub -section (1) of Secti on 3 shall be levied after
the expiry of the period for which the tax is paid under sub -section (1) and such tax shall be
paid within one month from the date of expiry of the said period.]1

[Explanation. —The tax for half -year shall be double the tax for a quarter and the tax for
a year shall be four times the tax for a quarter.]2
(2) In case of half -yearly and annual [payments]1, [or payments for the period of five
years or ten years]2 such rebate in respect of the tax as may be prescribed shall be granted.
[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sub -sections, the [tax levied
under the provisos]2 to sub -section (1) of section 3, shall be paid in advance in a lumpsum
by the registered owner or person having po ssession or control of the motor vehicle and the
tax so paid shall be for the life time of the vehicle:
Provided that the motor cycle in respect of which the tax is already paid under sub section (1) of section 3 prior to the first day of April, 1986, tax specified under the first
proviso to sub -section (1) of section 3 shall be levied after the expiry of the period for which
the tax paid under sub -section (1) and such tax shall be paid within one month from the date
of expiry of the said period.]1
[Provided further that in the case of tractors, trailers and power tiller trailers specified in
the second proviso to sub -section (1) of se ction 3, in respect of which the tax is already paid

under that sub -section prior to the first day of April, 1990, the tax specified under the second
proviso to sub -section (1) of section 3 shall be levied after the expiry of the period for which
the tax i s paid under sub -section (1) and such tax shall be paid within one month from the
date of expiry of the said period.]1

[Provided also that, in case of new vehicle registered or other State goods
vehicles migrating to this State having GVW exceeding 1500k gs but not exceeding
kgs, tax levied shall be levied under Part -A6.

Provided also that, in case of new vehicle registered or other State motor cab vehicles
migrating to this State tax shall be levied under Part -A8.]2

[Provided also that, in case of new vehicle registered or other State vehicles migrating to
this State, tax shall be levied as per the schedule Part -A.]3

[[XXX]1]2
[(4) Whenever there is a revision of tax, the difference of tax for the month or part thereof
shall be paid at the rate of 1/3rd of the quarterly tax, or 1/12th of the annual tax payable on
or before the last date fixed under sub -section (1) for payment of tax for the next quarter, or
the year as the case may be.]1
[4A. Rounding off of tax, etc. - The amount of tax (including tax payable in advance),
penalty or any other amount payable and the amount of refund due, under this Act shall be
rounded off to the nearest rupee and for this purpose, where such amount contains, a part of
a rupee consisting of paise, then, if such part is fifty paise or more, it shall be increased to
one rupee and if such part is less than fifty paise, it shall be ignored.]1
[5. Issue of taxation card. - (1) When the tax levied under section 3 in respect of a motor
vehicle is paid, the taxation authority shall issue to the person paying the tax, —
(a) a receipt in the prescribed form indicating therein the amount of tax paid; and
(b) a taxation card in the pr escribed form indicating therein the rate at which the tax is
leviable and the period for which the tax has been paid:
Provided that where a taxation card has already been issued in respect of a motor
vehicle, the taxation authority shall, on payment of ta x as aforesaid, cause to be made in the
taxation card an entry of such payment and the period to which it relates.
(2) No motor vehicle liable to tax under section 3, shall be held in the custody of any
person unless the registered owner or person having p ossession or control of such vehicle
has obtained a taxation card under sub -section (1) in respect of that vehicle.
(3) No motor vehicle liable to tax under section 3 shall be used on any road or in a public
place unless a valid taxation card obtained unde r sub -section (1) is carried in the vehicle.]1

6. Declaration by owner or person having possession of a vehicle. - (1) Every
registered owner of, or person who has possession or control of, a motor vehicle liable to tax
under this Act shall fill up and sign a declaration in the prescribed form, giving the prescribed
particulars and shall deliver within the prescribed time the declaration to a [taxation
authority]1 and shall pay to the [said authority]1 the tax which he is liable to pay in respect of
such vehicle.
(2) When a motor vehicle liable to tax under this Act is altered so as to render the
registered owner or person who is in possession or control o f such vehicle liable to the
payment of an additional tax under section 8, such registered owner or person, as the case
may be, shall fill up and sign an additional declaration in the prescribed form showing the
nature of the alteration made and containing the prescribed particulars, and shall deliver
such additional declaration together with the [taxation card]1 in respect of the motor vehicle
to a [taxation authority]1 and shall pay to the [taxation authority]1 the additional tax payable
under section 8. On receipt of such additional tax, the [taxation authority]1 shall issue to
such owner or person a fresh [taxation card]1 in place of the [original taxation card]1 and
shall cause an entry about such payment to be made in the [taxation card]1.
(3) Such owner or person shall, at the time of making payment of the tax under sub section (1) or the additional tax under sub -section (2), produce before the [taxation
authority]1 a valid certificate of insur ance in respect of the vehicle complying with the
requirements of Chapter VIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939.
7. Refund of tax. - (1) Where a tax on any motor vehicle has been paid for any period and
it is proved to the satisfaction of the prescribed authority that the vehicle has not been used
during the whole of that period, or a continuous part thereof, not being less than one
calendar month, a refund shall be made of such portion of the tax and subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed.
(2) When a motor vehicle in respect of which the tax has been paid is altered in such
manner as to cause it to become a vehicle in respect of which the tax is leviable at a lower
rate, the person who has paid such tax shall be entitled on the production of a certificate
signed by a registering authority stating that the vehicle had been so altered to a refund of a
sum equal to the difference between the amount which would be refundable to him in
accordance with the provisions of sub -section (1), on the surrender of the [taxation card]1
and the amount of the tax leviable on such vehicle at the lower rate.
[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections (1) a nd (2), where tax has been
paid under sub -section (3) of section 4, the registered owner who has paid such tax shall be
entitled to a refund of tax at the rate specified in [[Part C, Part CC, Part C1, Part C2, Part
C3, Part C4 and Part C5]3 [Part C6, Part C7 and Part C8]5 [Part C1(a), Part C4(a) and Part
C7(a)]7 as the case may be]2 of the schedule in the case of, —
(i) removal of the vehicle to any other State on transfer of ownership or change of
address; or
(ii) cancellation of registration of vehi cle on account of scrapping of such vehicle due to
accidents or other causes:

Provided that in the case of removal of vehicle outside the State of Karnataka on transfer
of ownership or on change of address the refund of tax will be considered only after re ceipt
of proof for having effected the transfer of ownership or change of address.
[provided further that the registered owner who has paid the tax in part under clause (i)
of third proviso of sub -section (3) of section 4 shall not be entitled for a refun d of tax, unless
the tax is paid in full.] 4
[Provided further that, the registered owner who has paid the tax in part under
clause (i) of third proviso of sub -section (3) of section 4 shall not be entitled for a
refund of tax, unless the tax is paid in f ull.]6
(4) Where a tax on any motor vehicle is paid in excess of the tax payable, the excess
payment of tax so made may be adjusted towards any of the subsequent periods in respect
of which the tax is due.]1
[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Rules made thereunder, no
refund of tax shall be allowed in respect of vehicles classified as Vintage or Classic cars
where the tax is paid for the life time of the vehicle as per sub -section (1) of Section 3 of the
Act, either on removal of the vehicle to any other State on transfer of ownership or on
change of address or on the cancellation of registration.]1
[(6) Notwithstanding any order or direction contained in any judgment, decree or order of
any Court, Tribunal or other authority, no refund of tax shall be allowed in respect of Motor
Vehicles on which tax is levied or deemed to have been levied and collected under the fifth
proviso to section 3 of the principal Act before the commencement o f the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Second Amendment) Act, 2007.]2
[Explanation. —For the purpose of this section tax includes surcharge and additional
surcharge payable under sections 3A and 3B.]3

8. Payment of additional tax. - When any motor vehicle in respect of which a tax has
been paid is altered or proposed to be used in such a manner as to cause the vehicle to
become a vehicle in respect of which a higher rate of tax is payable, the registered owner or
person who is in possession or control of such vehicle shall pay an additional tax of a sum
which is equal to the difference between the tax already paid and the tax which is payable in
respect of such vehicle for the period for which the higher rate of tax is payable in
consequence of its being altered or so proposed to be used and the [taxation authority]1

shall not grant a fresh [taxation card]1 in respect of such vehicle so altered or proposed to
be so used until such amount of tax has been paid.
[8A. Collection of tax escaping payment. - If at any time it is found that the amount of
tax paid for any period in respect of any motor vehicle falls short of the tax payable under
this Act, then, notwithstanding any incorrect entry or the absence of any entry in the
certificate of registration relating to the mot or vehicle regarding the tax payable in respect of
such vehicle or the issue of a taxation card or an entry having been made in such taxation
card regarding the payment of tax for such period, the taxation authority may, after notice to
the registered owne r or person having possession or control of the motor vehicle and giving
him an opportunity of being heard recover the difference between the tax so paid and the tax
payable by such owner or person.]1
[8B. F urther Additional Tax for misuse of Motor Vehicle. - When any motor vehicle in
respect of which tax has been paid is misused or used not in accordance with the purpose
for which the vehicle is registered or the permit is granted or is used in such manner as to
cause the vehicle to become a vehicle in respect of which a higher rate of tax is payable, the
registered owner or person who is in possession or control of such vehicle, shall for such
misuse other than the one under sub -section (4) of section 3, pay a further additional tax of a
sum which is equal to double the difference between the tax already paid and the tax which
is payable in respect of such vehicle for the period for which the higher rate of tax is payable
in consequence of its being misused or used not in accordance with the purpose for which
the vehicle is registered or the permit is granted.]1
9. Liability to pay arrears of tax. - (1) If th e tax leviable in respect of any motor vehicle
remains unpaid by any person liable for the payment thereof and such person before having
paid the tax has transferred the ownership of such vehicle or has ceased to be in possession
or control of such vehicle , the person to whom the ownership of the vehicle has been
transferred or the person who has possession or control of such vehicle shall be liable to pay
the said tax to the [taxation authority]1.
(2) Not hing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the liability of the person,
who has transferred the ownership or has ceased to be in possession or control of the
vehicle, to pay the said tax.
10. Levy of tax, etc., in the case of fleet owner. - [Notwithstanding anything contained
in sections 3, 6 and 7 a tax shall be levied [on the gross revenue from fares and freights of
Public Service Vehicles owned by a fleet owner at the rates of, -
(i) [five percentum]3 in respect of [public service vehicles referred to in the explanation to
clause (aa) of sub -section (1) of section 2] operating within the limits of a city and within the
radius of twenty five kilometers from the limits of the city as defined in clause (4) of section 2
of the Karnataka Municip al Corporations Act, 1976, (Karnataka Act 14 of 1976); and
(ii) [five per centum ]4 in other cases.]2]1

(a) In order to determine the amount of tax payable by a fleet owner in any year,
before the commencement of such year, the fleet owner shall first make a nd deliver to the
[taxation authority]1 a preliminary declaration in the prescribed form [estimated gross
revenue from fares and freights]2 in respect of the transport vehicles liable to tax under this
Act kept by him [on the last day of January]1 of the year immediately preceding the year for
which such declaration is made. Such declaration shall be accompanied by a certificate of
final assessment of tax, if any, issued by the [taxation authority]1 for such previous year and
such other documents as may be prescribed.
[(b) As soon as may be after receipt of such preliminary declaration, the taxation
authority shall, on the basis of such declaration deter mine the amount of tax to be paid
provisionally by such fleet owner at [five percentum or seven percentum as the case may
be]2 of the estimated revenue by way of fares and freights declared for the said year under
clause ( a) of this section and communicat e the same to the fleet owner by issuing a
certificate of provisional assessment of tax for the year in such form as may be prescribed.]1
[(c) The amount of tax provisionally determined under clause ( b) shall be paid by the
fleet owner within such period from the date of receipt of the certificate of provisional
assessment and in such number of instal ments not exceeding twelve as the taxation
authority may specify.]1
(d) [The fleet owner shall, after the close of the year]1 fill up and sign a final
declaration in the prescribed form [along with a cer tified copy of the audited accounts of the
fares and freights collected during that year]2 in respect of the transport vehicles liable to tax
under this Act kept by him [during that year]1 and shall deliver within the prescribed time the
final declaration so filled in and signed to the [taxation authority]1. Such declaration shall be
accompanied by the certificate of provisional assessment of tax issued by the [taxation
authority]1 for the year and such other documents as may be prescribed.
[(e) On receipt of such final declaration in the prescribed form along with a certified
copy of the audited accounts of fares and freights collected during that year a nd such other
particulars as may be deemed necessary, the Taxation Authority shall finally determine the
amount of tax leviable at the rate specified under this section on public service vehicle of
such fleet owner and by issuing a certificate of final ass essment of tax for the year in such
form, as may be prescribed.]1
(f) When the amount of tax is finally determined under clause ( e) taking into
consideration the amount paid by the fleet owner under clause (c), the difference that may
be due shall be paid by, or refunded to, the fleet owner in such manner and within such time
as may be prescribed:

[Proviso x x x]1

[Provided that the fleet owner shall be enti tled to a proportionate reduction in the amount
of tax finally determined, in respect of any motor vehicle which is certified by the
Commissioner of Transport as not used for a period of one calender month or more subject
to the condition that the fleet ow ner has intimated the fact of non -user of the motor vehicle to
the Commissioner for Transport within seven days of the date of commencement of the
period of non -user.]1
(g) Within thirty days of the transfer of ownership of any of his transport vehicles, the
fleet owner shall report the transfer to the [taxation authority]1
(h) The [taxation authority]1 may, for the purposes of this section, require the fl eet
owner to produce before him any transport vehicle or any accounts, registers, records, or
other documents or to furnish any information or may examine the vehicles or the accounts,
registers, records or other documents and the fleet owner shall comply with any such
requirement made of him.
[Explanation : For the purpose of this section, gross revenue from fares and freights
shall not include the amount reimbursed by the Government in respect of concessional
passes issued by the Fleet Owner.]2
[10-A. Levy of cess in the case of fleet owner. - [(1) There shall be levied and
collected by way of cess, at the rate of eleven percentum of the tax levied under section 10
on public service vehicles owned by fleet owner, of which ten percentum shall be for the
purpose of various infrastructure projects across the State, equity investment in Bangalore
Mass Rapid Transit Limited, Mukhya Manthri Grameena Rasthe Abhivruddhi N idhi in the
proportion of 57:28:15 respectively and one percentum for the purpose of Urban Transport
Fund.]2
(2) The cess levied under sub -section (1) shall be in addition to any tax levied under
(3) The provisions of the Act and the rules ma de thereunder including those relating to
refund or exemption from tax shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy,
assessment and collection of the cess payable under sub -section (1), as they apply in
relation to the levy, assessment and collec tion of motor vehicles tax levied under section 10]1
[[10AA.]3 Tax free taxation card. - Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding
sections, a motor vehicle exempted from tax [x x x]2 under section 16, shall carry in the
vehicle a tax free taxation card, obtained from a taxation authority on payment of the
prescribed fee.]1
11. Power of an officer of Police or the Motor Vehicles Department to stop a motor
vehicle. - Any Police Officer or officer of the Motor Vehicles Department, in uniform, not
below such rank as may be prescribed by the State Government in this behalf, may require
the driver of any motor vehicle in any public place to stop such vehicle and cause it to

remain stationary so long as may reasonably be necessary for the purpose of satis fying
himself that the amount of the tax due in accordance with the provisions of this Act in respect
of such vehicle has been paid.
[11A. Power to [seize, detain and sell]2 vehicles. - [(1)]3 Without prejudice to the
provisions of sections 13 and 14, wh ere any tax due in respect of any motor vehicle has not
been paid within the period specified in section 4, such officer, —
(i) of the Motor Vehicles Department not below the rank of an Inspector of Motor
Vehicles; or
(ii) of the Police Department not bel ow the rank of an Inspector of Police,
as the State Government may empower in this behalf, may, subject to such rules as may be
prescribed, seize and detain such vehicle and for this purpose, take or cause to be taken all
steps for the safe custody of the vehicle, until the tax due in respect of the vehicle is paid.]1
[(2) If the tax due in respect of t he vehicle seized and detained under sub -section (1), is
not paid within thirty days from the date of such seizure and detention, the officer
empowered by the State Government may, after giving a notice in writing to the registered
owner and the person who had the possession or control of the vehicle immediately before
such seizure and detention, and considering their objections, if any, recover the tax due by
sale of such vehicle in the manner prescribed:
Provided that the vehicle shall not be sold if the tax due is paid at any time before sale.]1
12. Penalties. - (1) Whoever, —
(a) as a registered owner or otherwise has possession or control of any motor vehi cle
liable to tax under this Act without having paid the amount of the tax or additional tax
due in accordance with the provisions of this Act in respect of such vehicle; or
(b) delivers a declaration or additional declaration wherein the particulars requ ired by or
under this Act to be therein set forth are not fully and truly stated;
shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which shall not be less than a sum equal to the
quarterly tax payable in respect of such vehicle and which may extend to a sum e qual to the
annual tax payable in respect of such vehicle; and in the event of such person having been
previously convicted of an offence under this section with fine which shall not be less than a
sum equal to the tax payable in respect of such vehicle fo r two quarters and which may
extend to a sum equal to twice the annual tax payable in respect of such vehicle; and the
amount of any tax due shall be recoverable as if it were a fine.
[(2) x x x]1
(3) Whoeve r,—
(a) contravenes the provisions of sub -section (3) of section 5; or
(b) fails to stop a motor vehicle when required to do so by any officer under section 11,
shall on conviction be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.
(4) Whoever con travenes any of the provisions of this Act other than those punishable
under sub -sections (1) and (3) shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may
extend to one hundred rupees.

[12A. Trial of offences. - No court inferior to that of a Metropolit an Magistrate or a
Judicial Magistrate of the First Class shall try an offence punishable under this Act or any
rule made thereunder.
12B. Composition of offences. - The prescribed officer may accept, in the prescribed
manner, from any person who has commit ted or is reasonably suspected of having
committed an offence punishable under sub -sections (1) and (3) of section 12 such sum of
money as may be prescribed, by way of composition of the offence which such person has
committed or is reasonably suspected of having committed and on the payment of such sum
of money to the prescribed officer such person, if in custody, shall be set at liberty and no
further proceedings shall be taken against such person with reference to the same act.]1
13. Tax leviable as arrear of land revenue. - Any tax due under this Act shall be leviable
as an arrear of land revenue. The motor vehicle in respect of which the tax is due or its
acces sories may be distrained or sold, whether or not such vehicle or accessories are in the
possession or control of the person liable to pay the tax.
14. Transport vehicle permit to be ineffective if tax not paid. - Notwithstanding the
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (Central Act IV of 1939), if the tax or the
instalment due in respect of a transport vehicle is not paid within the prescribed period the
validity of the permit for the vehicle shall become ineffective from the date of expiry of the
said period until such time as the tax is actually paid.
[15. Appeals. - (1) Any person who is aggrieved by any order of a Taxation Authority
made under this Act, may within the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner, appeal to
the prescribed authority.

(2) (a) No appeal shall be entertained by the appellate authority unless it is
accompanied by satisfactory proof of the payment of the tax not disputed in the appeal.

(b) Not withstanding that an appeal has been preferred under sub -section (1), the ta x
or other amount shall be paid in accordance with the order against which the appeal has
been preferred: [and such appeal shall be accompanied with a proof of payment of such amount] 2

Provided that the appellate authority may, in its discretion, give directions as it thinks
fit in regard to the payment of the tax or other amount payable under clause (b), if the
applicant furnishes sufficient security to its satisfaction in such form and in such manner as
may be prescribed.

(3) Any appeal preferred a fter the prescribed period shall be dismissed.]1
[15A. Revision. - The Commissioner for Transport may [x x x]2 call for and examine the
records of any proceedings under this Act of any authority subordinate to him for the
purpose of satisfying himself as to the correctness, legality, or propriety of such proceedings
and may either annul, reverse, modify o r confirm such order or pass such order as he may
deem fit:
Provided that no order shall be annulled, reversed or modified except after giving a
reasonable opportunity of being heard to the person affected by that order.]1

16. Exemption from or reduction of tax. - (1) The State Government, if in its opinion it is
necessary in p ublic interest so to do, may by notification [and subject to such restrictions
and conditions as may be specified in the notification]1,—
[(a) exempt or reduce whether prospectively or retrospectively the tax payable in
respect of, —
(i) any class of mo tor vehicles, or
(ii) motor vehicles not used on roads;]2
(b) reduce the rate of tax payable in respect o f any class of motor vehicles plying on
any route or routes specified in the notifications.
(2) Every notification under sub -section (1) shall be laid as soon as may be after it is
issued, before the State Legislative Assembly while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more sessions and if before the
expiry of that period, the State Legislative Assembly makes any modification in the
notification or directs that the notification shall not have effect, the notification shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be.
[(3) x x x]1
[16A. Composition of t ax.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, any
person liable to pay tax on any motor vehicle under this Act, may at his option, instead of
paying tax under the said section, pay such tax by way of composite amount, in respect of
such class o r classes of motor vehicles, as may be specified by the State Government, by
notification, from time to time, subject to such conditions or restrictions as may be specified
therein.
(2) Every notification issued under sub -section (1) shall be laid before e ach House of the
State Legislature in the manner specified in sub -section (2) of section 16.]1

CHAPTER III
MISCELLANEOUS
17. Crediting of the proceeds of taxes. - All taxes collected under this Act shall be
credited to such Head in the State Accounts as the State Government may by order specify.
[17A. x x x]1

18. Utilisation of the proceeds of taxes. - The Head of State Accounts specified under
charges, that is to say: -
(i) such amount as the Government may, by order determine on account of the expenses
incurred in giving effect to the provisions of this Act;
(ii) payments made to local authorities under section 20; and
(iii) allotments made by the Government for such other purposes as may be consistent
with, or necessary for, the more efficient administra tion of this Act.

19. Local authorities not to levy tax or tolls. - Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, no local authority shall levy a tax or toll on any
motor vehicle registered in the [State of Karnataka]1 or in any other State in India or in any
Union Territory in India, [and any law authorising any such levy shall cease to be in force.]2

[Explanation. —For the purposes of this section ‘tax’ means the tax referred to in Entries
and 57 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India.]2

20. Assignment of proceeds of the tax. - (1) From the proceeds of the tax colle cted
under this Act every year and subject to such conditions as the State Government may
specify, -
(i) there shall be paid to each local authority, which prior to the commencement of this
Act was being paid any amount under section 22 of the Mysore Motor Vehicles Taxation and
Tolls Act, 1951, or section 9 of the Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1935, or section 10 of
the Madras Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1931, or section 10 of the Coorg Motor Vehicles
Taxation Act, 1932, a sum equivalent to the said amount , every year;
(ii) there shall be paid annually to each local authority which at the commencement of
this Act was levying tax or toll or both under any law on motor vehicles, a sum equivalent to
the average annual income derived by such local authority dur ing the three years ending on
the 31st day of March 1957, from such tax or toll or both, as the case may be.
(2) All sums payable to local authorities under this section shall be expenditure charged
on the Consolidated Fund of the State.

21. Protection fo r bona fide acts. - No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall
lie against any person for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

22. Power to make rules. - (1) The State Government may, subject to the condition of
previous publication, by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the State
Government may make rules for all or any of the following purposes, viz.,
(a) to prescribe the manner in which the tax shall be paid;
(b) to prescribe the form of any [taxation card]1;
[(bb) to prescribe the manner and procedure in respect of sale of vehicle for recovery of
tax under sub -section (2) of section 11A;]1
(c) to prescribe the authority to which, the time within which and the manner in which an
appeal may be made under section 15, the fees to be paid in respect of such appeal and the
conduct and hearing of such appeal;
(d) to prescribe the conditions in which duplicate [taxation cards]1 may be granted and
the fee payable for such grant.
(3) Any rule made under this sec tion may provide that a breach thereof shall, on
conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.
(4) All rules made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after they are made,
before the State Legislative Assembly while it i s in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more Sessions and if, before the expiry
of the said period, the State Legislative Assembly makes any modification in the rules or
directs that any rule shall not have effect, the rules shall thereafter have effect, only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be.

23. Repeal and saving. - The Mysore Motor Vehicles Taxation and Tolls Act, 1951
([Karnataka]1 Act XII of 1951), as in force in the Mysore Area, the Madras Motor Vehicles
Taxation Act, 1931 (Madras Act III of 1931), as in force in the [Mangalore and Kollegal
Area]1, the Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1935 (Bombay Act XXXIV of 1935), as in force
in the [Belgaum Area]1, the Hyderabad M otor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1955 (Hyderabad Act
VI of 1955), as in force in the [Gulbarga Area]1, the Coorg Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
(Coorg Act I of 1932), as in force in the Coorg District, the Madras Motor Vehicles
Taxation of Passengers and Go ods Act, 1952 (Madras Act XVI of 1952), as in force in the
[Mangalore and Kollegal Area]1 and the Madras Motor Vehicles Taxation of Passengers and
Goods Act, 1952 (Madras Act XVI of 1952) as in force in the Bellary Distri ct are hereby
repealed:
Provided t hat such repeal shall not affect, —
(a) the previous operation of the said enactments or anything duly done or suffered
thereunder; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the said
enactments; or
(c) any p enalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed
against the said enactments; or
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,
obligation, liability, forfeiture or punishment as afo resaid;
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as i f this Act had
not been passed:
Provided further that any tax token or tax license is sued under any of the repealed
enactments shall continue to be valid for the period for which such token or license has been
issued as if it were a tax license issued under this Act.
[SCHEDULE
PART ‘A’
[See Section 3(1)]
Item No. Class of vehicles Quarterly tax for vehicles
fitted with pneumatic
tyres
2 3
Rs.Ps
[1. Motor Cycles (including Motor
Scooters and Cycl es with attachment of propelling the same by
mechanical power) owned by Central Government Employees
or Defence Personnel [or employees of public
sector undertakings owned by Government of
India including nationalised banks ]2 [which are
brought with them to the State of Karnataka on
transfer for which lifetime tax, or tax quarterly or
annually, as the case may be, has already been
paid in other states or union territories]4 [125.00]3]1
2. [[invalid carriages/Adapted vehicle/Divyangjan

(availing GST Concession) ]1]2 10.00

[3. [Goods Vehicles including mobile canteen, mobile library van, mobile workshop, mobile clinic, X -
Ray van, Cash van [already registered Com mercial Tractor Trailers in the State]6
(1) Vehicles in weight laden: -
(a) [XXX]2
(b) [XXX] 3
(c) [xxx]4Exceeding 5500 kgs but not exceeding 12000 kgs [already registered in the state]5
(d) Exceeding 12000 kgs.
but not exc eeding 15000 kgs. 2200 -00
(e) Exceeding 15000 kgs 2200 -00"
plus Rs. 75 -00 for every 250 kgs
or part thereof in excess of 15000 Kgs]1

[(2) Additional tax payable in respect of goods vehicles specified
in paragraph (1) used for drawing trailers for each trailer in weight
laden, —
for every 1000 Kgs. or part thereof - Rs. 100 -00
Provided that two or more goods vehicles shall not be
chargeable un der this item in respect of the same trailer.]1
[3A. Multiaxled Goods Vehicles other than articulated vehicles for
which tax is levied under item No. 10 having weight laden
exceeding
kgs. [2200. 00
plus Rs.75 -00 for every 250 kgs. or part thereof
in excess of 15000 kgs.]2]1
Substitute d by Act 8 of 2007 w.e.f 1.4.2007.
4. Motor Vehicles other than those mentioned in item 5, 6, 7, 8 and
plying for hire and used for Transport of passengers.
[(1) [already registered in the state ]6 Vehic les permitted to
carry excluding driver), —
[(a) xxx]2

[ [(b)Motor Cabs other than those
liable to be taxed in clause (c) for
every passenger 100.00]3]4
[ (c) Motor cabs registered outside the State and
covered with a permit issued under sub -section
(9) of section 88 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
(Central Act 59 of 1988) for every passanger

500.00 ]5
[(d) x x x
(e) x x x]2]1
5. Inserted by Act 18 of 2014 w.e. f. 1.3.2014.

[[2(a)]2 Vehicles permitted to carry more than 12
passengers (other than the driver and
conductor) and plying exclusively on routes
within the limits of cities and towns notified
by the Government, for every passenger
which the vehicle is permitted to carry. [[450.00 ]1]2]3
[(b) For every standing passenger,
which the vehicle is permitted to carry Rs. 100.00]1
[(3) Vehicles permitted to carry more
than 12 passengers (other than
the Driver and Conductor),
(a) for every seated passenger, which the
vehicle is permitted to carry [[900.00 ]2]3
(b) for every standing passenger which the
vehicle is permitted to carry 100.00]1
[(3A) x x x]1
[[(4) Maxicabs ]4;—

(a) having a floor area not exceeding six
square meters for every square meter [750.00]3
(b) having a floor area exceeding six squa re
meters for every square meter [700.00]2]1
3. Substituted by Act 4 of 2002 w. e.f. 1.4.2002.
[[[[[[[ [5
5(a)(i) Motor vehicles (Contract carriages) plying for hire or
reward and constructed or adopted to carry more
than 20 p assengers (excluding driver and conductor
or attendant) and comply with rule 151(2) of the
Karnata ka Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, for every
passenger.
1500.00
(ii) Motor vehicles (Contract carriages) plying for hire or
reward and constructed or adopted to carry more
than 12 passengers but not more than 20
passengers (excluding driver and conductor or
attendant)other than those liable to be taxed under
item 5(a)(i) for every passengers.

1500.00
(iii) Motor vehicles (Contract carriages) plying for hire or
reward and constructed or adopted to carry more
than 20 passengers (excluding driver and conductor
or attendant)other than those liable to be taxed
under item 5(a) (i) for every passengers.

2000.00

(iv) Motor ve hicles (LMV -Contract carriages) plying for
hire or reward and constructed or adopted to carry
more than 12 passengers but not more than 20
passengers (excluding driver and conductor or
attendant) which are converted from maxi cab where
registered/ conversi on on or before 28 -05-2021 and
comply with rule 151(2) of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Rules, 1989 for every passenger.

700.00

]10]9]8]5]4]3]2]1
(b) Motor vehicles plying for hire or reward constructed or
adapted to carry more than 12 passengers (excluding
driver and conductor/ attendant) and complying with
rule 151(2) of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Rules,
and covered by special permit issued under
every passenger [[1500 .00]6]7

10. Substituted by Act 29 of 2026 w.e.f .01.05.2026

[[[6. (a) Motor Vehicles (luxury buses) plying for hire or reward,
constructed or adapted to carry more than 12 passengers (excluding
driver and conducto r or attendant) and comply with rule 128 of the
Central Motor Vehicles rules, 1989, or Motor Vehicles with permits
granted under Rule 82 to 85 -A of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules
or permits under sub -section (14) read with sub -section (9) of
permitted to carry more than twelve passengers (excluding driver and
conductor or attendant) for every passenger. [[ 2500.00]5 ]4]3]2]1
2. Renumbered by Act 12 of 2005 w.e.f 1.4.2005.
5. Substituted by Act 29 of 2026 w.e.f .01.05.2026

[[ [(b) Motor Vehicles (Sleeper Coach es) plying for hire or
reward, constructed or adapted to carry passengers
(excluding driver and conductor or attendant) and comply
with rule 125(c) with AIS 119 standards of the Central
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, or Motor Vehicles with
permits granted und er rule 82 to 85 -A of the Central Motor
Vehicles Rules, 1989 or permits under sub -section (14)
read with sub -section (9) of section 88 of the Motor
Vehicles Act 1988, plying for hire or reward permitted to
carry more than twelve passengers (excluding drive r and
conductor or attendant) for every sleeper.
3000.00]3 ]2]1

1. Omitted by Act 8 of 2007 w.e.f 1.4.2007.
3. Substituted by Act 29 of 2026 w.e.f 01.05.202 6

[7 (a) Campers van used for hire or reward based on floor
area for every square meter
4700.00
(b) Motor vehicles registered as sleeper coaches and
permitted to carry more than 12 passengers (excluding
the driver and conductor or attendant) for every sleeper
which the vehicle is permitted to carry - 3000.00]1

[8. Omni buses and private service vehicles: —
(a) [x x x]1

[(b) Having floor area exce eding 5 square
metres, but not exceeding 6 square
metres, for every square metre [800.00]1
(c) Having floor area exceeding 6 square
metres but not exceeding 9 square
metres, for every square metre [850.00]1
(d) Having floor area exceeding 9 square
metres but not exceeding 12 square
metres, for every square metre [950.00]1
(e) Having floor are a exceeding 12
square metres, for every square metre [1100.00]2]1
(f) (i) Owned by schools and exclusively used for
conveyanc e of school
children and staff of such schools,
for every square metre of floor area [[100.00]1]2
(ii) Owned by other Educational Institutions and
exclusively used for conveyance of students and staff
of such institutions, for every squar e
metre of floor area [[200.00]1]2
(iii) Owned by the Driving Training Schools, and
exclusively used for Driving Training, for every
square
metre of floor area. [200.00]4
(iv) Omni buses owned by religi ous or charitable
institutions for imparting moral, spiritual education or
used for charitable purpose, and registered and
recognised as such by Endowment Commissioner or
Charity Commissioner or approved by the Government
of Karnataka, for
every square metre of floor area. 150.00]2
[8A.Omini Buses and Private Service Vehicles held
under lease agreement with industrial
undertakings or companies for the purposes of
providing transport conveyance to their
employees from residence to factories/
companies vice -versa and such industrial
undertakings or companies being holder of
permit of such vehicles.
(a) Having floor area e xceeding 5 square metres but

not exceeding 6 square metres, for every square
metre.
(b) Having floor area exceeding 6 square metres but
not exceeding 9 square metres, for every square
metre
(c) Having floor area exceeding 9 square metres but
not exceeding 12 squar e metres, for every square
metre
(d) Having floor area exceeding 12 square metres, for
every square metre
-00

-00

-00

-00]1
[9. Ambulance or Hearse van used for hire or
reward 250.00]1
10. Motor Vehicles not themselves constructed to
carry any load (other than water, fuel, accumu -
lators and other equipment used for the purpose
of propulsion, loose tools and loose equipment)
used for haulage solely and weighing together
with the largest number or trailers proposed to be
drawn in weight laden, -
(a) Not exceeding 3000 kgs. 195.00
(b) Exceeding 3000 kgs. but not ex ceeding
kgs. 360.00
(c) Exceeding 5000 kgs. but not exceeding
kgs. 780.00
(d) Exceeding 7000 kgs. but not exceeding
kgs. 1365.00
(e) Exceeding 9000 kgs. but not exceeding
kgs. 1625.00
[(f) Exceeding 12,000 kgs. but not exc eeding
15,000 kgs. 1,785.00
(g) Exceeding 15,000 kgs. [2300.00
plus Rs. 75 for every 250 kgs. or part thereof in
excess of 15,000 kgs.]2]1

11. [XXX]1
12. Fire Engines, Fire tenders and road water sprinklers in weight
laden, —
[(1) For every 1000 Kgs. or part thereof 100.00]1
[(2) For every 1000 Kgs. or part thereof 30.00]1

[13. Motor vehicles [already registered in the State]3 mounted with Drilling Rigs or
mounted with Air Compressor with drilling rig
unit. [3000.00]2]1

[14 (1) (xxx)]1
(2) Motor Cars including Jeeps owned by
Central Governm ent Employees or
defence personnel. [or employees of
public sector undertakings owned by
Government of India including
nationalised banks ]1 [which are brought
with them to the State of Karnataka on
transfer fo r which lifetime tax, or tax
quarterly or annually, as the case
may be, has already been paid in
other states or union territories]3 [500.00]2
[[15.(xxx)]1
15A. Imported cars of the year 1981 and later models manufactured
or assembled outside India and owned by the persons other
than companies, in weight unladen, —
(a) Not exceeding 1500 kgs. 1000.00
(b) Exceeding 1500 kgs. but not exceeding
kgs. 1060.00
(c) Exceeding 2000 kgs. but not exceeding
kgs. 1220.00
(d) Exceeding 3000 kgs. but not exceeding
k gs. 1420.00
(e) Exceeding 4000 kgs. but not exceeding
kgs. 1620.00
(f) Exceeding 5000 kgs. 1820.00
(c) Additional Tax Payable in respect of
such vehicles used for drawing trailers 50.00]1
1. Items 15 and 15A Substituted by Act 12 of 1990 w. e.f. 1.4.1990.

[16. [(i) [x x x]3 [Campers van not used for hire or reward and
motor vehicles other than those liable to tax under the
foregoing provisions of the schedule, in weight unladen, —]4
(a) Not exceeding 1500 kgs. 150.00
(b) Exceeding 1500 kgs. but not
exceeding 2000 kgs. 175.00
(c) Exceeding 2000 kgs. but not
exceeding 3000 kgs. 275.00
(d) Exceeding 3000 kgs. but not
exceeding 4000 kgs. 375.00
(e) Exceeding 4000 kgs. but not
exceeding 5000 kgs. 575.00
(f) Exceeding 5000 kgs. bu t not
exceeding 6000 kgs. 875.00
(g) Exceeding 6000 kgs. but not
exceeding 7000 kgs. 975.00
(h) Exceeding 7000 kgs. 1075.00]2
(ii) Additional tax payable in respect of such vehicle other than
Camper Van used for drawing trailers —
(a) for each trai ler not exceeding 1000 kgs. 30.00
(b) for each trailer exceeding 1000 kgs. 40.00
(iii) Additional tax payable in respect of such vehicles used for
drawing campers trailers —
(a) For each trailer not exceeding 1000 kgs. 100.00
(b) For each trailer excee ding 1000 kgs.
but not exceeding 2000 kgs. 200.00
(c) For each trailer exceeding 2000 kgs.
but not exceeding 3000 kgs. 300.00
(d) For each trailer exceeding 3000 kgs.
but not exceeding 4000 kgs. 400.00
(e) For each trailer exceeding 4000 kgs.
but not exceeding 5000 kgs. 500.00
(f) For each trailer exceeding 5000 kgs.
but not exceeding 6000 kgs. 600.00
(g) Exceeding 6000 kgs. 700.00]1
3. Omit ted by Act 7 of 1995 w.e.f . 1.4.1995.

[[Part A1
(See Section3 (1))
Lifetime Tax for Two Wheelers

Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Motor cycles
which cost
does not
exceeds
Rs. 50,000/ - Motor cycl es
cost of which
exceeds
Rs.50,000/ -
but does not
exceeds Rs.
1,00,000/ - Motor cycles
cost which
exceeds Rs.
1,00,000/ - Motor
Cycles run
on
Electricity
2 3 4 5 6
A At the time of
Registration of New
Vehicles 10 percent of
cost of the
Vehicle 12 perc ent of
the cost of the
Vehicle 18 percent of
the cost of
the Vehicle 4 per cent of
cost of the
vehicle
B If the vehicle is already
registered and its age
from the month of
Registration is: Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause A Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause
A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93% 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years but
not more than 3 Years 87% 87% 87% 87%
More than 3 Years but
not more than 4 Years 81% 81% 81% 81%
More than 4 Years but
not more than 5 Years 75% 75% 75% 75%
More than 5 Years but
not more than 6 Years 69% 69% 69% 69%
More than 6 Years but
not more than 7 Years 64% 64% 64% 64%
More than 7 Years but
not more than 8 Years 59% 59% 59% 59%
More than 8 Years but
not more than 9 Years 54% 54% 54% 54%
More than 9 Years but
not more than10 Years 49% 49% 49% 49%
More than 10 Years
but not more than11
Years 45% 45% 45% 45%
More than 11 Years
but not more than12
Years 41% 41% 41% 41%
More than 12 Years
but not more than13
Years 37% 37% 37% 37%
More than 13 Years
but not more than 14 33% 33% 33% 33%

Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Motor cycles
which cost
does not
exceeds
Rs. 50,000/ - Motor cycl es
cost of which
exceeds
Rs.50,000/ -
but does not
exceeds Rs.
1,00,000/ - Motor cycles
cost which
exceeds Rs.
1,00,000/ - Motor
Cycles run
on
Electricity
2 3 4 5 6
Years
More than 14 Years
but not more than 15
Years 29% 29% 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25% 25% 25%

Notes:
1. In respect of vehicles for which lifetime tax was due prior to the 1st day of April 2017,
but has not been paid, such tax shall be collected at the rates prevailing prior to such
day along with the penalty due, if any.

2. Purchase Invoice shall be produced in respect of vehicles which are registered on or
after 1st day of April 2007.

3. Cost of the vehicle in relation to a motor vehicle means –
(a) In respect of a vehicle manufactured in In dia, cost of the vehicle as per
the purchase invoice issued either by the manufacturer or by the dealer
of the vehicle including the excise duty, [xxx]3, surcharge or cess,
[Goods and Services Tax]4 etc., as payable in the State of
Karnataka[whichever is higher]5; and

(b) In respect of an imported motor vehicle, irrespective of its place of
manufacture, the total cost incurred in importing the vehicle, that is to
say, the value of the motor vehicle as endorsed in the Bill of Entry or
such other document a nd assessed as such under the Customs Act.
1962, together with the Customs Duty levied, freight charges incurred
and other taxes levied thereupon including additional duty/penalty levied
if any, by the Customs Department or any other Department.”]1]2

3. Omitted by Act 3 of 2020 w.e.f 01.04.2020
4. Substituted by Act 3 of 2020 w.e.f 01.04.2020
5. Inserted by Act 3 of 2020 w.e.f 01.04.2020

[PART —A2]1
[See Section 3(1)]
Item Power
No. Class of Vehicles Tractors Trailers Tiller
Trailers
2 3 4 5
Rs. Ps. Rs. Ps. Rs. Ps.
Tractors, Trailers and Power tiller trailers specified in
the second proviso to sub -section (1) of section 3.
(A) At the time of registratio n of
new vehicles. 1,500.00 500.00 500.00
(B) If the vehicle is already
registered and its age from the
month of registration is: —
1. Not more than two years. 1,400.00 470.00 470.00
2. More than two years but
not more than 3 years. 1,300.00 440.00 440.00
3. More than 3 years but not
more than 4 years. 1,200.00 410.00 410.00
4. More than 4 years but not
more than 5 years. 1,100.00 380.00 380.00
5. More than 5 years but not
more than 6 years. 1,000.00 350.00 350.00
6. More than 6 year s but not
more than 7 years. 900.00 320.00 320.00
7. More than 7 years but not
more than 8 years. 800.00 290.00 290.00
8. More than 8 years but not
more than 9 years. 700.00 260.00 260.00
9. More than 9 years but not
more than 10 years. 600.00 230.00 230.00
10. More than 10 years but not
more than 11 years. 500.00 200.00 200.00
11. More than 11 years but not
more than 12 years. 400.00 170.00 170.00
12. More than 12 years but not
more than 13 years. 300.00 140.00 140.00
13. More than 13 years but not
more than 14 years. 300.00 110.00 110.00
14. More than 14 years but not
more than 15 years. 300.00 80.00 80.00
15. More than 15 years. 300.00 50.00 50.00
Note: — In respect of vehicles for which the tax due prior to the First day of Apri l, 1990 but has not
been paid, such tax shall be collected at the rates existing prior to the First day of April, 1990.

[PART –A2(a)
[see section 3(1)]
Commercial Tractors Trailers
Sl.
No. Classes of vehicles Commercial Tractors
Trailers
2 3
A At the time of Registration of New Vehicle 10 % of cost of the
Vehicle
B If the vehicle is already registered and its age from the month of
Registration is: Percentage of the Life
Time Tax levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93%
More than 2 Years but not more than 3 Years 87%
More than 3 Years but not more than 4 Years 81%
More than 4Years but not more than 5 Years 75%
More than 5 Years but not more than 6 Years 69%
More than 6 Years bu t not more than 7 Years 64%
More than 7 Years but not more than 8 Years 59%
More than 8 Years but not more than 9 Years 54%
More than 9 Years but not more than10 Years 49%
More than 10 Years but not more than11 Years 45%
More than 11 Years but not more than12 Years 41%
More than 12 Years but not more than13 Years 37%
More than 13 Years but not more than 14 Years 33%
More than 14 Years but not more than 15 Years 29%
More than 15 years 25%
]1
1. Inserted by A ct 29 of 2026 w.e .f. 01.05.2026

[[PART —A3]2
[See Section 3(1)]
Item No. Class of Vehicles Life time tax
1. Vintage Car [x x x]3 500.00
2. Classic Car [x x x]3 1000.00]1
[PART -A4
[Lifetime tax for three wheeler Auto rickshaw carrying passengers (3+1) and
goods carrier having Gross Vehicle Weight not exceeding 1500 Kgs. either used for
hire or reward or not.]2
Item
No. Class of Vehicle Rate of Tax in
rupees
2 3
A At the time of registration of new vehicle 2500 -00

B If the vehicle is already registered and its age from
the month of registration is;
(i) Not more than 2 years
(ii) more than 2 years but not more than 3 years
(iii) more than 3 years but not more than 4 years
(iv) more than 4 years but not more than 5 years
(v) more than 5 yea rs but not more than 6 years
(vi) more than 6 years but not more than 7 years
(vii) more than 7 years but not more than 8 years
(viii) more than 8 years but not more than 9 years
(ix) more than 9 years but not more than 10 years
(x) more than 10 years]1

-00
-00
-00
-00
-00
-00
-00
-00
-00
-00"

[[[[[[[PART A5
(see section 3(1))

Lifetime Tax for Motor cars, Jeeps, Omn i Buses and Private Service Vehicles.

Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Motor cars, Jeeps,
Omni Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles having floor
area up to 5 Sq. Mtrs,
cost of which does
not exceed Rs.
Lakhs. Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles having
floor area up to
Sq. Mtrs, cost
of which
exceedsRs 5
Lakhs but does
not exceed
Rs.10Lakh Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles
having floor
area up to 5 Sq.
Mtrs, cost of
which exceeds
Rs10 Lakhs b ut
does not
exceed Rs.20
Lakhs Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles having
floor area up to
Sq. Mtrs, cost
of which
exceeds
Rs.20 Lakhs.
2 3 4 5 6
A At the time of
Registration of New
Vehicle 13 % of cost of
the Vehicle 14 % of the
cost of the
Vehicle 17% of the
cost of the
Vehicle 18% of the
cost of the
Vehicle
B If the vehicle is
already registered
and its age from the
month of Registration
is: Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause
A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause
A
Not more than 2
years 93% 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years
but not more than 3
Years 87% 87% 87% 87%

More than 3 Years
but not more than 4
Years 81% 81% 81% 81%
More than 4 Years
but not more than 5
Years 75% 75% 75% 75%
More than 5 Years
but not more than 6
Years
69% 69% 69% 69%
More than 6 Years
but not more than7
Years
64% 64% 64% 64%
More than 7 Years
but not more than 8
Years 59% 59 59% 59%
More than 8 Years
but not more than 9
Years 54% 54% 54% 54%
More than 9 Years
but not more than 10
Years 49% 49% 49% 49%
More than 10 Years
but not more than11
Years 45% 45% 45% 45%
More than 11 Years
but not more than12
Years 41% 41% 41% 41%
More than 12 Years
but not more than13
Years 37% 37% 37% 37%
More than 13 Years
but not more than 14
Years 33% 33% 33% 33%
More than 14 Years
but not more than 15
Years 29% 29% 29% 29%
More than15 years 25% 25% 25% 25%

]1]2]3]4]5]6]7

4. Inserted by Act 3 of 2020 w .e.f. 01.04 .2020

[PART A5(a)
(see section 3(1))
(Battery Operated Vehicle (BOV))
Lifetime Tax for Motor cars, Jeeps, Omni Buses and Private Service Vehicles which
run on Electricity
Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Motor cars, Jeeps,
Omni Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles run on
Electricity having
cost of the vehicle
which does not
exceed Rs. 10
Lakhs Motor cars, Jeeps,
Omni Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles run on
Electricity having
cost of the vehicle
which exceeds Rs.
Lakhs but does
not exceed Rs 25
Lakhs Motor cars, Jeeps,
Omni Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles run on
Electricity having
cost of the vehicle
which exceeds Rs.
Lakhs
2 3 4 5
A At the time of
Registration of New
Vehicle 5 % of cost of the
Vehicle 8 % of the cost of the
Vehicle 10 % of the cost of
the Vehicle
B If the veh icle is
already registered
and its age from the
month of
Registration is: Percentage of the
Life Time Tax levied
under Clause A Percentage of the Life
Time Tax levied
under Clause A Percentage of the
Life Time Tax levied
under Clause A
Not more than 2
years 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years
but not more than 3
Years 87% 87% 87%
More than 3 Years
but not more than 4
Years 81% 81% 81%
More than 4Years
but not more than 5
Years
75% 75% 75%
More than5Years
but not more than6
Years
69% 69% 69%
More than6Years
but not more than7
Years 64% 64% 64%
More than7Years
but not more than 8
Years 59% 59% 59%
More than 8Years
but not more than 9
Years 54% 54% 54%
More than9Years
but not more 49% 49% 49%

than10 Years
More than10Years
but not m ore
than11 Years 45% 45% 45%
More than11Years
but not more
than12 Years
41% 41% 41%
More than12Years
but not more
than13 Years 37% 37% 37%
More than13Years
but not more than
Years 33% 33% 33%
More than14Years
but not more than
Years 29% 29% 29%
More than15 years 25% 25% 25%
]1
1.Inserted by Act 29 of 2026 w.e.f . 01.05.2026

[[[PART A6
(See Section 3(1))
Life time tax for goods vehicles having gross vehicle weight exceeding
1,500 Kgs. But not exceeding 12,000 Kgs. In weight la den, whether
used for hire or reward or not.
Item
No. Class of Vehicles Goods
vehicle
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
Kgs.
and not
exceeding
Kgs. Goods
vehicle
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
2000Kgs.
and not
exceeding
3000Kgs. Good s
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
3,000Kgs.
and not
exceeding
5,500Kgs. Goods
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
5,500Kgs.
and not
exceeding
7,500Kgs. Goods
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
7,500Kgs.
and not
excee ding
9,500Kgs. Goods
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
9,500Kgs.
and not
exceeding
12,000Kgs.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
A At the time of
Registration of New
Vehicle 20,000 30,000 40,000 60,000 80,000 1,00,000
B If the vehicle is
already registered
and its age from the
month of
Registration is: Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A
Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A
Not more than 2
years 93% 93% 93% 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years
but not more than 3 87% 87% 87% 87% 87% 87%

Years
More than 3 Years
but not more than 4
Years 81% 81% 81% 81% 81% 81%
More than 4 Years
but not more than 5
Years 75% 75% 75% 75% 75% 75%
More than 5 Years
but not more than 6
Years
69% 69% 69% 69% 69% 69%
More than 6 Years
but not more t han 7
Years 64% 64% 64% 64% 64% 64%
More than 7 Years
but not more than 8
Years 59% 59% 59% 59% 59% 59%
More than 8 Years
but not more than 9
Years 54% 54% 54% 54% 54% 54%
More than 9 Years
but not more than 10
Years 49% 49% 49% 49% 49% 49%
More than 10 Years
but not more than 11
Years 45% 45% 45% 45% 45% 45%
More than 11 Years
but not more than 12
Years 41% 41% 41% 41% 41% 41%
More than 12 Years
but not more than 13
Years 37% 37% 37% 37% 37% 37%
More than 13 Years
but not more tha n 14
Years 33% 33% 33% 33% 33% 33%
More than 14 Years
but not more than 15
Years 29% 29% 29% 29% 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25%
]1]2]3

[[[ [ [PART A7
(see section 3(1))

Lifetime Tax for Construction Equipment Vehicles (As renumbered and defined u nder
Rule 2(cab) of C M V Rules,1989) And vehicles fitted with Air Compressor and
Generators.

Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Construction
equipment vehicles
2 3
A At the time of Registration of New Vehicles 10 percent of cost of the
Vehicle
B If the ve hicle is already registered and its age from the
month of Registration is: Percentage of the Life
Time Tax levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93%
More than 2 Years but not more than 3 Years 87%
More than 3 Years but not more than 4 Years 81%
More than 4 Years but not more than 5 Years 75%
More than 5 Years but not more than 6 Years 69%
More than 6 Years but not more than 7 Years 64%
More than 7 Years but not more than 8 Years 59%
More than 8 Years but not more than 9 Years 54%
More than 9 Years but not more than 10 Years 49%
More than 10 Years but not more than 11 Years 45%
More than 11 Years but not more than 12 Years 41%
More than 12 Years but not more than 13 Years 37%
More than 13 Years but not more th an 14 Years 33%
More than 14 Years but not more than 15 Years 29%
More than 15 years 25%
]8]7]6]2
Notes :

1. In respect of vehicles for which tax was due prior to the 1st day of April, 2010, but has not been
paid ,such tax shall be collected at t he rates prevailing prior to such day along with the penalty
due, if any.

2. Purchase Invoice shall be produced in respect of vehicles which are registered on or after 1st
day of April 2007.
3. Cost of the vehicle in relation to a motor vehicle means –
(a) In respect of a vehicle manufactured in India, cost of the vehicle as per the purchase
invoice issued either by the manufacturer or by the dealer of the vehicle including the excise
duty, [xxx]3, surcharge or cess, [Goods and Services Tax]4 etc., as payable in the State of
Karnataka [whichever is higher]5; and

(b) In respect of an imported motor vehicle, irrespective of its place of manufacture, the
total cost incurred in importing the vehicle, t hat is to say, the value of the motor vehi cle as
endo rsed in the Bill of Entry or su ch other document and assessed as such under the
Customs Act. 1962, together with the Customs Duty levied, freight charges incurred and other
taxes levied thereupon including additional duty/penalty levied if any, by the Customs
Department or any other Department.]1

8. Substituted by Act 29 of 2026 w.e.f . 01.05.2026

[[[[[[[[[[ PART A8
{see section 3(1)}
Lifetime Tax for Motor Cabs other than those registered out - side the State and
covered with the permit issued under sub -section (9) of Section 88 of the Motor
Vehicle Act 1988(Central Act 59 of 1988).

Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Cost of the
vehicle which
does not exceed
Rs. 10 Lakhs Cost of the
vehicle which
exceeds
Rs. 10 Lakhs but
does not exceed
Rs. 15 Lakhs Cost of the
vehicle which
exceeds
Rs. 15 Lakhs

2 3 4 5
A At the time of Re gistration
of New Vehicles 5% of the cost of
the vehicle 9% of the cost of
the vehicle 15% of the cost of
the vehicle
B If the vehicle is already
registered and its age from
the month of Registration
is: Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Claus e A Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years but not
more than 3 Years 87% 87% 87%
More than 3 Years but not
more than 4 Years 81% 81% 81%
More than 4 Years but not
more than 5 Years 75% 75% 75%
More than 5 Years but not
more than 6 Years 69% 69% 69%
More than 6 Years but not
more than 7 Years 64% 64% 64%
More than 7 Years but not
more than 8 Years 59% 59% 59%
More than 8 Years but not
more than 9 Years 54% 54% 54%
More than 9 Years but not
more than 10 Years 49% 49% 49%
More than 10 Years but not
more than 11 Years 45% 45% 45%
More than 11 Years but not
more than 12 Years 41% 41% 41%
More than 12 Yea rs but not
more than 13 Years 37% 37% 37%
More than 13 Years but not
more than 14 Years
33% 33% 33%

More than 14 Years but not
more than 15 Years 29% 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25% 25%

]1]2]3]4]5]6]7]8]9]10

[PART A8(a)
(see section 3(1))
(Battery Operated Vehicles (BOV))
Lifetime Tax for Motor Cabs other than those registered out - side the State and
covered with the pe rmit issued under sub -section (9) of Section 88 of the Motor
Vehicle Act 1988(Central Act 59 of 1988).
Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Motor Cabs which
run on Electricity
having cost of the
vehicle which does
not exceed Rs. 10
Lakhs Motor Cabs which run
on Elect ricity having
cost of the vehicle
which exceeds Rs. 10
Lakhs but does not
exceed Rs. 25 Lakhs Motor Cabs which
run on Electricity
having cost of the
vehicle which
exceeds Rs. 25
Lakhs
2 3 4 5
A At the time of Registration
of New Vehicles 5% of the cos t of
the vehicle 8% of the cost of
the vehicle 10% of the cost of
the vehicle
B If the vehicle is already
registered and its age from
the month of Registration
is: Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years but not
more than 3 Years 87% 87% 87%
More than 3 Years but not
more than 4 Years 81% 81% 81%
More than 4 Years but no t
more than 5 Years 75% 75% 75%
More than 5 Years but not
more than 6 Years 69% 69% 69%
More than 6 Years but not
more than 7 Years 64% 64% 64%

More than 7 Years but not
more than 8 Years 59% 59% 59%
More than 8 Years but not
more than 9 Years 54% 54% 54%
More than 9 Years but not
more than 10 Years 49% 49% 49%
More than 10 Years but
not more than 11 Years
45% 45% 45%
More than 11 Years but
not more than 12 Years 41% 41% 41%
More than 12 Years but
not more than 13 Years 37% 37% 37%
More than 13 Years but
not more than 14 Years 33% 33% 33%
More than 14 Years but
not more than 15 Years 29% 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25% 25%
]1
[Part A9
{See Section 3 (1)}
Lifetime ta x for Combine Harvester Vehicle (As defined under rule 2 clause (cb) of the
Central Motor Vehicle rules, 1989)
Sl No

(1)
Class of Vehicle

(2) Combine Harvester
Vehicle used for Sugar
Cane Harvesting only
With effect from the date
of publication of the
Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation
(Second Amendment )
Act, 2020
(3) Subject to column (3)
Combine Harvester
Vehicle including
Sugar Cane Harvester
With effect from
1st April 2015
(4)
A At the time of Registration of New
Vehicles 3 percent of the cost of the
vehicle 6 percent of the cost of
the Vehicle.
B If the Vehicle is already registered
and its age from the month of
Registration is: Percentage of the Life
Time Tax Levied under
serial number
A Percentage of the Life
Time Tax Levied under
serial num ber A
Not more than 2 years 93% 93%
More than 2 years but not more
than 3 years 87% 87%
More than 3 years but not more
than 4 years 81% 81%
More than 4 years but not more
than 5 years 75% 75%
More than 5 years but not more
than 6 years 69% 69%
More than 6 years but not more 64% 64%

than 7 years
More than 7 years but not more
than 8 years 59% 59%
More than 8 years but not more
than 9 years 54% 54%
More than 9 years but not more
than 10 years 49% 49%
More than 10 years but not more
than 11 years 45% 45%
More than 11 years but not more
than 12 years 41% 41%
More than 12 years but not more
than 13 years 37% 37%
More than 13 years but not more
than 14 years 33% 33%
More than 14 years but not more
than 15 years 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25%

Notes :
Cost of the Vehicle in relation to a motor Vehicle means, -
(a) In respect of a vehicle manufactured in India, cost of the Vehicle as per the
purchase invoice issued either by the manufacturer or by the dealer of the
vehicle including the excise duty, surcharge or cess, Goods and Services Tax
etc., as payable in the State of Karnataka whichever is higher; and
(b) In respect of an imported motor vehicle, irrespective of its place of
manufacture, the total cost incurred in im porting the vehicle, that is to say, the
value of the motor vehicle as endorsed in the bill of entry or such other
document and assessed as such under the Customs Act, 1962, together with
the customs duty levied freight charges incurred and other taxes lev ied there
upon including additional duty/penalty levied if any, by the Customs
Department or any other Department.]1
[PART A -10
(see section 3(1))
Lifetime Tax for Motor Vehicles Mounted with Drilling Rigs or Mounted with Air
Compressor with drilling rig unit vehicles

Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Cost of the vehicle
2 3
A At the time of Regi stration of New Vehicles 10% of the cost of
the vehicle

B If the vehicle is already registered and its age from the month of
Registration is: Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93%
More than 2 Years but not more than 3 Years 87%
More than 3 Years but not more than 4 Years 81%
More than 4 Years but not more than 5 Years 75%
More than 5 Years but not more than 6 Years 69%
More than 6 Years but not more than 7 Years 64%
More than 7 Years but not m ore than 8 Years 59%
More than 8 Years but not more than 9 Years 54%
More than 9 Years but not more than 10 Years 49%
More than 10 Years but not more than 11 Years 45%
More than 11 Years but not more than 12 Years 41%
More than 12 Years b ut not more than 13 Years 37%
More than 13 Years but not more than 14 Years 33%
More than 14 Years but not more than 15 Years 29%
More than 15 years 25%
]1

PART ‘B’
[See Section 3 (2)]
For perio d not For period
Item exceeding 7 exceeding 7
No. Class of Vehicles days at a days but not
time exceeding
days
2 3 4
Rs. Ps. Rs. Ps.
1. Motor Cycles (including Motor Scooters and cycles with
attachment for propelling the same by mechan ical
powers) not exceeding 400 kgs. in weight unladen.
(a) Bicycles not exceeding 50 c.c.if not
used for drawing a trailer or side Car. 5.00 10.00
(b) Bicycles exceeding 50 c.c. but not exceeding 300
c.c.if not used for
drawing a trailer or side c ar. 7.00 15.00
(c) Bicycles not exceeding 300 c.c.
used for drawing a trailer or
side car and Bicycles exceeding

c.c. whether used for draw -
ing a trailer or side car or not 10.00 15.00
(d) Tricycles including Autorickshaws
not used for tra nsportation of
goods or passengers for hire
or reward 15.00 25.00
2. Invalid Carriages 3.00 5.00
[3 (1) Goods vehicles including mobile canteen,
mobile library van, mobile workshop, mobile clinic,
X-ray van, cash van, (1) in weight laden, -
(a) Not exceeding 3000 kgs. - 100-00 300-00
(b) Exceeding 3000 kgs
but not exceeding 5500 kgs. - 200-00 600-00
(c) Exceeding 5500 kgs.
but not exceeding 12000 kgs. - 300-00 900-00
(d) Exceeding 12000 kgs.
but not exceeding 15000 kgs. - 450-00 1400 -00
(e) Exceeding 15000 kgs. - 460-00 1380 -00
plus 75 -00 plus160 -00
for every for every
kgs. 250 kgs.
or part or part
thereof thereof
in excess in excess
of 15000 of 15000
kgs. kgs.
(2) Additional tax paya ble in respect of goods vehicles specified in paragraph (1)
used for drawing trailers for each trailer in weight laden;
for every 1000 kgs. or part thereof - Rs. 25 -00 75 -00
Provided two or more goods vehicles shall not be
chargeable under this item in respect of the same
trailer. ]1
[3A Multiaxled goods vehicles other than
articulated vehicles for which tax is
levied under item 10, having weight
laden exceeding 15000 kgs. [360.00]2 [950.00]2
plus Rs. 25.00 plus Rs. 75.00
for every 250 for every 250
kgs. or part kgs. or part
thereof in thereof in
excess of excess of
kgs. 15000 kgs.]1
4. Motor vehicles other than those mentioned in item 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 plying for hire and used for
transport
of passengers and in respect of which

permits have been issued under the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939.
[(1) Vehicles permitted to carry
(excludi ng driver), —
[(a) Not more than five Passen -
gers for every passenger 10.00 30.00]1
[(b) xxx]1
[(c) xxx]1
(d) Not more than six passengers
(Motor Cabs). for every
passenger. [75.00]1 [150.00]1
(e) More than six passengers but
not more than twelve passen -
gers (Maxi cabs), for every
passeng er [75.00]2 [150.00]2]1
[(2) vehicles permitted to carry more
than 12 passengers (other than
Driver and Conductor), —
(a) for every seated pa ssenger whi -
ch the vehicle is permitted to
carry 100.00 200.00
(b) for every standing passenger,
which the vehicle is permitted
to carry 20.00 50.00]1
(3) [x x x]1
[5. [Motor Vehicles [contract carriages
including Motor Vehicles covered with
permits issued under section 88(8) of
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988] plying
for hire or reward and constructed
or adopted to carry mor e than 12
passengers (excluding driver and
conductor / attendant) and complying
with rule 151(2) of the Karnataka
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 for every

passenger.] 3 [300.00]2 [450.00]2]1
[6. [Motor vehicles [contract carriages including Motor Vehicles covered with
permits issued under section 88(8) of the Motor Vehicles Act 1988] plying for
hire or r eward and constructed or adopted to carry more than 12 passengers
(excluding driver and conductor / attendant) other than those liable to be taxed
under item 5, for every passenger.]2 3 [600.00] 3 [1500.00]3

[7. Campers Van/ Sleeper Coach used for hire or reward
based on floor area, for
every squaremeter . [700.00]2 [1400.00]2]1
[8. Omni Buses, Private Service Vehicles, -
(1) other than those owned by Educational Institutions, vehicles permitted to
carry, -
(a) upto 12 persons
for every person 75-00 100-00

(b) exceeding 12 persons
for every person 100-00 200-00
(2) owned by Educational Institutions, -
for ever y person 10-00 30-00"
[9. Ambulance or Hearse van used
for hire or reward. 15.00 25.00]1
10. Motor vehicles not themselves constructed to carry a ny
load (other than water, fuel, accumulators and other
equipment used for the purpose of propulsion, loose
tools and loose equipment) used for haulage solely and
weighing together with the largest number of trailers
proposed to be drawn in weight laden, —
[(a) Not exceeding 7500 kgs. 150-00 400-00
(b) exceeding 7500 kgs. but
not exceeding 15000 kgs. 300-00 900-00

(c) Exceeding 15000 kgs. 300-00 900-00
+ Rs.40/ - + Rs. 80/ -
for every for every
Kgs 250 Kgs
or part part thereof
in excess in excess
of 15000 of 15000
Kgs Kgs]1
[11.Tractors, Trailers and Power tiller trailers specified in
the second proviso to sub -section (1) of
[12. Fire engines, fire tenders and road
water sprinklers in weight laden, -
(1) for every 1000 kgs. or part thereof
10-00 30-00
(2) Additional tax payable in respect of
such vehicles used for drawing trailers
including fire engines, trailers pumps
for each trailer with weight laden:
for every 1000 kgs.
or part thereof 5-00 20 -00
Provided that two or more vehicles shall not be
chargeable under this clause in respect of the
same trailers.]1
[13.Motor vehicles mounted with dri lling rigs or mounted
with Air Compressor
with drilling rig unit. [500.00]2 [1000.00]2]1
[14. xxx]1
[15.xxx]1
[15A.xxx]1
[16. Motor cars including imported cars whether owned by companies or not, campers van not
used for hire or reward and motor ve hicles other than those liable to taxunder the foregoing
provisions of this schedule,in weight unladen, -
(a) for every 1000 kgs. or part thereof 75-00 200-00

(b) Additional tax payable in respect of such vehicles used for drawing trailers, -
for every 1 000 kgs. or part thereof 10-00 300]1
[17. [Motor -Vehicles Registered as Cranes, Mobile
Cranes, Tower Wagons”, Tree Trimming Vehicles,
Fork Lifts, Vehicles -fitted with Air Compressor or
Generator, f or every 1000 kgs. or part thereof in
weight unladen.]2 25.00 50.00]1

[PART -‘C’
REFUND TABLE
[See Section 7(3)]
Vehicles Vehicles
Vehicles exceeding exceeding
Item Scale of Refund not 75 CC 300 CC or
No. exceeding but not Motor Cycle
CC exceeding attached
CC with a side
car or
Trailer
2 3 4 5
A. If after the Registration removal of vehicle or
cancellation o f Registration of vehicle takes
place: —
(1) Within a year 1055.00 2400.00 3360.00
(2) After 1 year but within
years 1010.00 2300.00 3220.00
(3) After 2 years but within
years 965.00 2200.00 3080.00
(4) After 3 years but within
years 920.00 2100.00 2940.00
(5) After 4 years but within
years 875.00 2000.00 2800.00
(6) After 5 years but within
years 830.00 1900.00 2660.00
(7) After 6 years but within
years 785.00 1800.00 2520.00
(8) After 7 years but within
years 740.00 1700 .00 2380.00
(9) After 8 years but within
years 695.00 1600.00 2240.00

(10) After 9 years but within
years 650.00 1500.00 2100.00
(11) After 10 years but within
years 605.00 1400.00 1960.00
(12) After 11 years but within
years 560.00 1300.00 1820.00
(13) After 12 years but within
years 515.00 1200.00 1680.00
(14) After 13 years but within
years 470.00 1100.00 1540.00
(15) After 14 years but within
years 425.00 1000.00 1400.00
(16) After 15 years Nil Nil Nil
Note: — In case where the lifetime tax has been paid under part A1 existed prior to the Ist day of April
the refund of tax shall be under the refund table as in force prior to the first day of April
1997.]1

[PART CC
[See Section 7(3)]
Refund table for two -wheelers irrespective of the cost of the vehicles in respect of which
Lifetime tax is paid on or after 01 -04-2007

Sl.
No. If after the registration removal o f vehicles
or cancellation of Registration of vehicle
takes place. Percentage of Life time
tax paid to be refunded.
(1) (2) (3)
1. Within a year 93%
2. After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
3. After 2 years but within 3 years 81%
4. After 3 years but wi thin 4 years 75%
5. After 4 years but within 5 years 69%
6. After 5 years but within 6 years 64%
7. After 6 years but within 7 years 59%
8. After 7 years but within 8 years 54%
9. After 8 years but within 9 years 49%
10. After 9 years but within 10 y ears 45%
11. After 10 years but within 11 years 41%
12. After 11 years but within 12 years 37%
13. After 12 years but within 13 years 33%
14. After 13 years but within 14 years 29%
15. After 14 years but within 15 years 25%
16. After 15 years Nil

Note :

In cases where the Lifetime tax has been paid under Part A1 as in force prior to the First day
of April, 2007 the refund of tax shall be as provided under the refund tables as in force prior to the
First day of April, 2007.]1

[PART -C1]1
REFUND TABLE
[See Section 7(3)]
Item Power
No. Scale of Refund Tractors Trailers Tiller Trailers
2 3 4 5
If after the registration, removal of Vehicles or
Cancellation of registration of vehicles takes
place :—
1. Within a year. 1400.00 470.00 470.00
2. After 1 year but within
years. 1300.00 440.00 440.00
3. After 2 years but within
years. 1200.00 410.00 410.00
4. After 3 years but within
years. 1100.00 380.00 380.00
5. After 4 years but withi n
years. 1000.00 350.00 350.00
6. After 5 years but within
years. 900.00 320.00 320.00
7. After 6 years but within
years. 800.00 290.00 290.00
8. After 7 years but within
years. 700.00 260.00 260.00
9. After 8 years but within
years . 600.00 230.00 230.00
10. After 9 years but within
years. 500.00 200.00 200.00
11. After 10 years but within
years. 400.00 170.00 170.00
12. After 11 years but within
years. 300.00 140.00 140.00

13. After 12 years but within
years . 200.00 110.00 110.00
14. After 13 years but within
years. Nil 80.00 80.00
15. After 14 years but within

years. Nil 50.00 50.00
16. After 15 years. Nil Nil Nil]2

[PART C1(a)
(see section 7(3))
Refund Table for Commercial Tractors Trailers
Sl.No. If after the registration removal of vehicles or
cancellation of Registration of vehicle taken place. Percentage of Life Time Tax paid
to be refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but wi thin 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil
]1
[PART C2
Refund table for three wheelers including
Autorickshaws carrying passenger or goods
Not exceeding 1500 kgs. In weight laden either
Used for hire or reward or not.
(see section 7(3)).
Sl.No. Scale of refund Amount of refund in rupees
(1) (2) (3)
If after the re gistration, removal of
vehicles or cancellation of registration
of vehicles takes place;
(i) Within 2 years 2400.00
(ii) After 2 years but within 3 years 2300.00
(iii) After 3 years but within 4 years 2200.00

(iv) After 4 years but within 5 years 2100.00
(v) After 5 years but within 6 years 2000.00
(vi) After 6 years but within 7 years 1900.00
(vii) After 7 years but within 8 years 1800.00
(viii) After 8 years but within 9 years 1700.00
(ix) After 9 years but within 10 years 1600.00
(x) After 10 years NIL]1

[PART C3
[See Section 7(3)]
Refund Table for Motor Cars, Jeeps, Onmibuses and Private Service Vehicles [in respect of which life
time tax is paid from 1.4.2000 to 31.3.2003.]2
Item Class of Vehicles Motor Cars & Motor Cars Motor Cars Motor Cars Omnibuses Omnibuses
No. Jeeps Not & Jeeps & Jeeps & Jeeps Private and private
Exceeding Exceeding Exceeding Cost of which Service service
CC 800 CC but 1500 CC Exceeds More Vehicles vehicles
Not Exceeding & Above or than Rs.6 lakhs having Floor having floor
CC Attached Area upto area excee -
with Trailer 4 Sq.Mtrs ding 4 Sq. Mtrs
but not excee -
ding 5 Sq. Mtrs
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
If after the registration, removal of vehicles or cancellati on of registration of vehicles takes place:
(i) Within a year 11280.00 16920.00 22560.00 42300.00 28200.00 33850.00
(ii) After 1 year but 10560.00 15840.00 21120.00 39600.00 26400.00 31700.00
within 2 years
(iii) After 2 years but 9840.00 14760.00 19680.00 36900.00 24600.00 29550.00
within 3 years
(iv) After 3 years but 9120.00 13680.00 18240.00 34200.00 22800.00 27400.00
within 4 years
(v) After 4 years but 8400.00 12600.00 16800.00 31500.00 21000.00 25250.00
within 5 years
(vi) After 5 yea rs but 7680.00 11520.00 15360.00 28800.00 19200.00 23100.00
within 6 years
(vii) After 6 years but 6960.00 10440.00 13920.00 26100.00 17400.00 20950.00
within 7 years
(viii) After 7 years but 6240.00 9360.00 12480.00 23400.00 15600.00 18800.00
within 8 years
(ix) After 8 years but 5520.00 8280.00 11040.00 20700.00 13800.00 16650.00
within 9 years
(x) After 9 years but 4800.00 7200.00 9600.00 18000.00 12000.00 14500.00
within 10 years
(xi) After 10 years but 4080.00 6120.00 8160.00 15300. 00 10200.00 12350.00
within 11 years
(xii) After 11 years but 3360.00 5040.00 6720.00 12600.00 8400.00 10200.00
within 12 years
(xiii) After 12 years but 2640.00 3960.00 5280.00 9900.00 6600.00 8050.00
within 13 years
(xiv) After 13 years but 1920.00 2880.00 3840.00 7200.00 4800.00 5900.00

within 14 years
(xv) After 14 years but 1200.00 1800.00 2400.00 4500.00 3000.00 3750.00
within 15 years
(xvi) After 15 years Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil” Nil
Note: — In case where the life time tax has been pai d under part A5 existed prior to the First day of April 2000,
the refund of tax shall be under the refund table as in force prior to the first day of April 2000. ]1
[PART C4
[See Section 7(3)]
Refund table for Motor Cars, jeeps, Omni Buses and Private Service Vehicles having floor area
upto 5 Sq.Mtrs irrespective of the cost of the vehicles in respect of which Lifetime tax is paid
on or after 01 -04-2007

Sl.
No. If after the registration removal of vehicles or
cancellation of Registration of vehicle takes
place. Percentage of Life
time tax paid to be
refunded.
(1) (2) (3)
1. Within a year 93%
2. After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
3. After 2 years but withi n 3 years 81%
4. After 3 years but within 4 years 75%
5. After 4 years but within 5 years 69%
6. After 5 years but within 6 years 64%
7. After 6 years but within 7 years 59%
8. After 7 years but within 8 years 54%
9. After 8 years but within 9 years 49%
10. After 9 years but within 10 years 45%
11. After 10 years but within 11 years 41%
12. After 11 years but within 12 years 37%
13. After 12 years but within 13 years 33%
14. After 13 years but within 14 years 29%
15. After 14 years but within 15 years 25%
16. After 15 years Nil
Note :
In case where the Lifetime tax has been paid under Part A5 prior to the First day of April,
the refund of tax shall be under the refund table as in force prior to the First day of April, 2007.]1
\

[PART C4(a)
(see section 7(3))
Refund Table for Motor cars, Jeeps, Omni Buses and Private Service Vehicles which
run on Electricity.
Sl.No. If after the registration removal of vehicles or
cancellation of Registrati on of vehicle taken
place. Percentage of Life Time
Tax paid to be refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil
]1

[[[PART C5
(See Section 7(3))
Refund table for goods vehicles having gross vehicle weight
exceeding 1,500 Kgs. But not exceeding 12,000 Kgs. in respect of
which lifetime tax is paid under Part A6
Sl. No. If after the registration removal of
vehicles or c ancellation of
Registration of vehicle taken place. Percentage of Life
Time Tax paid to be
refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%

After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil
]1]2]3

[PART C6
See Section 7(3)
[Refund Table for Construction Equipment Vehicles (As defined under clause (cab) of r ule 2
of Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 ) and vehicles fitted with Air Compressor or Generators ]2
Sl.
No. If after the registration remov al of vehicles or
cancellation of Registration of vehicle taken place. Percentage of Life Time
Tax paid to be refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil
]1

[[[[[PART C7
(See section 7(3))
Refund Table for Mot or Cab

Sl. No. If after the registration removal of
vehicles or cancellation of
Registration of vehicle taken place. Percentage of Life
Time Tax paid to be
refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil
]1]2]3]4]5

[PART C7(a)
(see section 7(3))
Refund Table for Motor cab which run on Electricity.
Sl.No. If after the registration removal of vehicles or
cancellation of Registration of vehicle taken
place. Percentage of Life Time
Tax paid to be refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%

After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but with in 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil
]1

[Part C8
{See Section 7 (3)}
Refund Table for Combined Harvester Vehicles

Sl. No.
(1) If after the Registration removal of
vehicle or cancellation of
Registration of vehicle taken place.
(2) Percentage of Life Time Tax
Paid to be Refunded
(3)
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but wit hin 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 ye ar but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 y ears 25%
After 15 years Nil”
]1

[Part – E
(See Section 3 (5)
Tax payable on all motor vehicles including chassis, requiring temporary registration

Item
No. Class of vehicles For a period not
exceeding 30 days
2 3
a. Motor Cycles / three wheeled vehicles 100.00
b. Light Motor Vehicles, other than three wheeled vehicles 200.00
c. Medium Passenger Vehicles / Medium Goods Vehicles. 400.00
d. Heavy Passenger Vehicles / Heavy Goo ds Vehicles. 600.00
e. Chassis to which body has not been attached. 500.00
f. Any other vehicles. 300.00
]1

* * * *
NOTIFICATION
I
Bangalore, dated 18th December, 1957. [No. HD 146 MVT 57]
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section (3) of section 1 of the Mysore Motor Vehicles
taxation Act, 1957 (Mysore Act 35 of 1957), the Government of Mysore hereby appoints the first day
of January, 1958 as the date on which the said Act shall come into force.

By Order and in the name of the President of India,
(R.J. REBELLO )
Secreta ry to Government, Home Department.

II
Bangalore, dated 30th November, 1971. [No. HD 92 TMT 71]
S.O. 2002. —In exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section (2) of section 1 of the Mysore
Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1971 (President’s Act No. 16 of 1971), the Government of
Mysore hereby appoints the first day of December 1971 as the date on which the said Act shall come
into force.
By Order and in the name of the President of India,
(N. LAKSHMANA RAU)
Commissioner for Home Affairs and
Secretar y to Government, Home
Department.

III
Bangalore, dated 11th June 1976. [No. HD 40 TMT 76]

S.O. 1588. —In exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section (2) of section 1 of the Karnataka
Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 38 of 1976), the Government of
Karnataka hereby appoint the First day of July 1976, as the date on which the provisions of sections
1, 3, 9, 17, 19 and 21 of the said Act shall come into force.
By Order and in the name
of the Governor of Karnataka,

(K. P. RAMA KRISHNA )
Under Secretary.

IV

Bangalore, dated 24th December 1976. [No. HD 263 TMT 76(1)]

S.O. 3237. —In exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section (2) of section 1 of the Karnataka
Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 38 of 1 976), the Government of
Karnataka hereby appoints the 1st day of January 1977, as the date on which the provisions of the
said Act other than those notified in notification No. S.O. 1588 (HD 40 TMT 76, dated 11th June
1976), shall come into force.

By Orde r and in the name of the
Governor of Karnataka,

(G. G. PUROHIT )
Deputy Secretary.

V
ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಸರ್ಕಾ ರ
ಸಂಖ್ಯೆ :ಟಿಡಿ 17 ಟಿಡಿಆರ 2024/ ಭಾ-1 ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಸರ್ಕಾರದ ಸಚಿವಾಲಯ ,
ಬಹುಮಹಡಿಗಳ ಕಟಡ ,
ಬೆಂಗಳೂರು , ದಿರ್ನೆಂಕ :27.01.2025.

ಅಧಿಸೂಚನೆ
ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಮೋಟಾರು ವಾಹನಗಳ ತೆರಿಗೆ ನಿರ್ಾರಣೆ (ಎರಡನೇ ತಿದ್ದು ಪಡಿ )
ಅಧಿನಿಯಮ , 2024 (2025 ರ ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಅಧಿನಿಯಮ ಸಂಖ್ಯೆ :3) ಕಲಂ 1ರ ಉಪ ಕಲಂ
(2)ರಲ್ಲ ಿ ಪ ರ ದತ್ ತ ವಾದ ಅಧಿರ್ಕರವನ್ನು ಚಲಾಯಿಸಿ , ಸರ್ಕಾರದ ಅಧಿಸೂಚನೆ
ಸಂಖ್ಯೆ :ಸಂವೆ ಶಾಇ 62 ಶಾಸನ 2024 ದಿರ್ನೆಂಕ :09.01.2025 ರನವ ಯ ಹೊರಡಿಸಿರುವ
ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಮೋಟಾರು ವಾಹನಗಳ ತೆರಿಗೆ ನಿರ್ಾರಣೆ (ಎರಡನೇ ತಿದ್ದು ಪಡಿ ) ಅಧಿನಿಯಮ ,
ರ ಉಪಬಂರ್ಗಳು ದಿರ್ನೆಂಕ :01.02.2025 ರಿೆಂದ ಜಾರಿಗೆ ಬರತ್ಕ ಕ ದ್ು ೆಂದ್ದ ಈ ಮೂಲಕ
ಗೊತ್ತ ತ ಪಡಿಸಿ ಆದೇಶಿಸಿದ್ .

ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ರಾಜ್ೆ ಪಾಲರ ಶಾನ್ನಸಾರ
ಮತ್ತ ತ ಅವರ ಹೆಸರಿನಲ್ಲ ಿ

(ಪುಷ್ಪ ವಿ .ಎಸ್)
ಸರ್ಕಾರದ ಅಧಿೋನ ರ್ಕಯಾದಶಿಾ ,
ಸಾರಿಗೆ ಇಲಾಖ್ಯ .
VI
ಅಧಿಸೂಚನೆ

ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಮೋಟಾರು ವಾಹನಗಳ ತೆರಿಗೆ ನಿರ್ಾರಣೆ (ತಿದ್ದು ಪಡಿ) ಅಧಿನಿಯಮ
ರ (2025 ರ ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಅಧಿನಿಯಮ ಸಂಖ್ಯೆ : 24) ಕಲಂ 1ರ ಉಪ ಕಲಂ ( 2)ರಲ್ಲ ಿ
ಪ ರ ದತ್ ತ ವಾದ ಅಧಿರ್ಕರವನ್ನು ಚಲಾಯಿಸಿ , ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಸರ್ಕಾರವು ಸದರಿ ಅಧಿನಿಯಮದ
ಉಪಬಂರ್ಗಳು ದಿರ್ನೆಂಕ: 01.05.2025 ರಿೆಂದ ಜಾರಿಗೆ ಬರತ್ಕ ಕ ದ್ು ೆಂದ್ದ ಈ ಮೂಲಕ
ಗೊತ್ತ ತ ಪಡಿಸಿದ್.

ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ರಾಜ್ೆ ಪಾಲರ ಆದೇಶಾನ್ನಸಾರ
ಮತ್ತ ತ ಅವರ ಹೆಸರಿನಲ್ಲ ಿ

(ಪುಷ್ಪ ವಿ.ಎಸ್ )
ಸರ್ಕಾರದ ಅಧಿೋನ ರ್ಕಯಾದಶಿಾ
ಸಾರಿಗೆ ಇಲಾಖ್ಯ

VII

KARNATAKA ACT NO 7 OF 2010
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the Thirty First day of March, 2010)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDME NT) ACT, 2010
(Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirty First day of March, 2010)

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957)for the purpose hereinafter appearing;
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty first year of the Republic of India
as follows: -
1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the Karnatak a Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of April, 2010.
(Sections 2 to 4 incorporated in the Principal Act)
5. Power to remove difficulty: - If any difficulty arises in giving effect to t he provisions of the
Gazette, make such provisions as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
said difficulty.

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the
date of commencement of this Act.
KARNATAKA ACT NO 17 OF 2011
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the Twenty First day of March, 2011)

THE KARNATAKA MOTO R VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2011
(Received the assent of the Governor on the Fifteenth day of March, 2011)

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing:
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty -second year of the Republic of
India as follows: -
1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Ac t may be called as the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of April, 2011.
(Sections 2 to 3 incorporated in the Principal Act)
4. Power to remove difficulty. - If any diffic ulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Amendment Act, the State Government may by notification in the official Gazette, make such
provisions as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the said difficulty:
Provided that n o such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the
date of commencement of this Amendment Act.

KARNATAKA ACT NO. 14 OF 2012
(First published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the thirty -first day of March, 2012)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2012
(Received the assent of the Governor on the thirty -first day of March, 2012)

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend th e Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing;
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty third year of the Republic of
India as follows: -
1. Short title and commencement :- (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2012
(2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of April, 2012.
(Sections 3 to 4 incorporated in the Principal Act)
5. Power to remove difficulty .- If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the
Gazette, make such provisions as may appear it to be necessary or expedient for removing the sa id
difficulty.
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the
date of commencement of this Act.

KARNATAKA ACT NO 29 OF 2012
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the Fourth da y of August, 2012)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (SECOND AMENDMENT) ACT, 2012
(Received the assent of the Governor on the Third day of August, 2012)

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.

Whereas it is exped ient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing;
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the sixty -third year of the
Republic of India as follows: -
1. Short title and commencement :- (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Second Amendment) Act, 2012
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st day of April, 2012.

5.Savings. - Where in respect of any Motor Cabs the cost of which exceeds Rupees ten
lakhs but does not exceed Rupees fifteen lakhs, -
(a) lifetime tax has been paid from 1st day of April, 2012 ti ll the date of publication of the
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Second Amendment) Act, 2012 in the official
Gazette shall be entitled for refund subject to the payment of quarterly tax.
(b) tax was due prior to the 1st day of April 2012, but has not been paid, such tax shall be
collected at the rates prevailing prior to such day along with the penalty due, if any.
(c) lifetime tax was due after 1st day of April, 2012 but has not been paid such tax shall
be collected alongwith the penalty.

KARNATAK A ACT NO 30 OF 2013
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the eleventh day of March, 2013)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2013
(Received the assent of the Governor on the fifth day of March 2013)
An Act fu rther to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.

Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles
Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter
appearing;
Be it enacted by the Karnataka Sta te Legislature in the Sixty Fourth Year of
the Republic of India as follows: -

1. Short title and commencement :- (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka
Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2013

(2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of April, 2013.

2. Amendment of section 4. - In the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) in section 4 , in sub -section (3), third prov iso shall be omitted.

KARNATAKA ACT NO 18 OF 2014
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the Twenty –eighth day of February, 2014)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 2014
(Received the assent of the Gov ernor on the Twenty –eighth day of February, 2014)
An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.

Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles
Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter
appearing;
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty fifth year of the
Republic of India as follows: -
1. Short title and commencement :- (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka
Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2014.

(2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of March, 2014.

2. Amendment of section 3. - In the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 3, in
sub section (1), in the fourth proviso, -
(i) the explanation shall be renumbered as Explanation 1 and
after explanation 1 as so renumbered, the following shall be inserted,
namely: -
"Explanation -2.- In respect of motor vehicles registered outside the State of
Karnataka and which are in the State for a period exceeding thirty days, notwithstanding
anything contained in the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of

1988), and in any order or direction contained in any judgment or order of a ny Court, tax
shall be levied as specified in Parts A1, A2, A4, A5, A6, A7 and A8 as the case may be"; and

(ii) in clause (d), after the words "the cost of which exceeds rupees fifteen lakhs", the
words, figures and brackets "other than those registered outsid e the State and covered with a
permit issued under sub -section (9) of section 88 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act
of 1988)" shall be inserted.

3. Amendment of Schedule. - In schedule to the Principal Act, -
(1) in part A, in item 4, -
(i) in sub-item (1), for clause (b) the following shall be substituted,
namely: -
"(b) Motor Cabs other than those 100.00
liable to be taxed in clause (c) for
every passenger"
(ii) after clause(b), the following shall be inserted, namely: -
"(c) Motor cabs r egistered outside the State
and covered with a permit issued under sub section (9) of section 88 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988) for every
passanger" 500.00
(iii) in sub -item (4), in column (2), for the words and brackets "Vehi cles
permitted to carry six passengers (Motor Cabs and Maxi Cabs)", the
words "Maxi Cabs" shall be substituted.

(2) in Part A8, in the heading, after the words "the cost of which exceeds rupees fifteen
lakhs", the words, figures and brackets "other than those registered outside the State and
covered with a permit issued under sub -section (9) of section 88 of the Motor Vehicles Act,
(Central Act 59 of 1988)" shall be inserted.

By Order and in the name of
the Governor of Karnataka,

S.B. GUNJIGAVI
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary
Affairs and Legislation

KARNATAKA ACT NO 08 OF 2016
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the Thirty First day of March,
2016)
THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT ) ACT, 2016
(Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirty First day of March, 2016)
An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.

Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
(Ka rnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing;

Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty seventh year of the
Republic of India as follows: -

1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the
Karnataka Mot or Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2016.

(2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of April, 2016.

In the Schedule in part A, amendments made to entries 4, 5 and 6 are in corporated in the
Principal Act.

KARNATAKA ACT NO. 16 OF 2 017
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 31st day of March, 2017)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2017
(Received the assent of Governor on the 31st day of March, 2017)

An Act further to amend the Karnat aka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.

Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation
Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purpose hereinafter appearing: Be it enacted by
the Karnataka State Legislature in the Si xty Eighth year of the Republic of India as follows: -

1. Short title and commencement :- (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2017. (2) It shall come into force with effect from first
day of April 2017.

2. Amendment of Schedule :- In the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957), in the schedule, for Part A1 the following shall be substituted,
namely: -

In the Schedule, Part A1 is incorporated in the Principal Act.

KARNATAKA ACT NO. 25 OF 2018

(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 19th day of July, 2018)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2018
(Received the assent of Governor on the 18th day of July, 2018)

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.
Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation
Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purpose hereinafter appearing:

Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legis lature in the Sixty Ninth year of the
Republic of India as follows: -

1. Short title and commencement :- (1) This Act may be called the
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of A ugust, 2018.
In the Schedule, Part A item 8A is incorporated in the Principal Act.

KARNATAKA ACT NO.3 OF 2020
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 26thn Day of March 2020)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT) A CT, 2020
(Received the assent of the Governor on the 24th day of March 2020)
An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purpose hereinafter appearing:
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the seventy first year of the
Republic of India as follows:
1. Short title and commencement : (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Tax ation (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of April, 2020.
In the Schedule, Part A item No.5 , Part A1 item No.3 , Part A5 item No.3 , Part A7 item No.3
and Part A8 item No.2 are incorporated in the Principal Act.

KARNATAKA ACT NO.09 OF 2021
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 23rd day of February, 2021)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (SECOND AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020
(Received the assent of the Governor on the 20th day of February, 2021)

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.

Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation
Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purpose hereinafter appearing:

Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the seventy first year of the
Republic of India as follows: -

1. Short title and commencement :- (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Second Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall be deemed to ha ve come into force with effect from 1st day of April 2015,
except column (3) of part A 9 of the schedule which shall come into force at once.
2. Amendment of Section 3, -In the Karnataka Motor Vehicle Taxation Act, 1957
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) (hereinaf ter referred to as ‘the Principal Act’) in Section 3, in sub section (1), in the fourth proviso, after the clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted;
namely: -

"(e)In case of Combined Harvester Vehicles (as defined in clause (cb) of rule
of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989) tax shall be levied at the rates
specified in Part -A9 of the Schedule".

3. Amendment of section 7: -In Section 7 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (3), after the words, letter and figure“ and Part C5”, the words, letter s and figures
“Part C6, Part C7 and Part C8” shall be inserted.

4. Amendment of the Schedule: - In the Schedule to the principal Act, -
(1) after part A8 the following new part A9 shall be inserted, namely: -

“Part A9
{See Section 3 (1)}
Lifetime tax for Combin e Harvester Vehicle (As defined under rule 2 clause (cb) of the
Central Motor Vehicle rules, 1989)
Sl No

(1)
Class of Vehicle

(2) Combine Harvester
Vehicle used for Sugar
Cane Harvesting only
With effect from the date
of publication of the
Karnataka Mo tor
Vehicles Taxation
(Second Amendment )
Act, 2020
(3) Subject to column (3)
Combine Harvester
Vehicle including
Sugar Cane Harvester
With effect from
1st April 2015
(4)
A At the time of Registration of New
Vehicles 3 percent of the cost of the
vehicle 6 percent of the cost of
the Vehicle.
B If the Vehicle is already registered
and its age from the month of
Registration is: Percentage of the Life
Time Tax Levied under
serial number
A Percentage of the Life
Time Tax Levied under
serial number A
Not more than 2 years 93% 93%
More than 2 years but not more
than 3 years 87% 87%
More than 3 years but not more
than 4 years 81% 81%
More than 4 years but not more
than 5 years 75% 75%
More than 5 years but not more
than 6 years 69% 69%
More than 6 years but not more
than 7 years 64% 64%
More than 7 years but not more
than 8 years 59% 59%
More than 8 years but not more
than 9 years 54% 54%
More than 9 years but not more
than 10 years 49% 49%

More than 10 years but not more
than 11 years 45% 45%
More than 11 years but not more
than 12 years 41% 41%
More than 12 years but not more
than 13 years 37% 37%
More than 13 years but not more
than 14 years 33% 33%
More than 14 years but not more
than 15 years 29% 29%
More th an 15 years 25% 25%

Notes :
Cost of the Vehicle in relation to a motor Vehicle means, -
(c) In respect of a vehicle manufactured in India, cost of the Vehicle as per the
purchase invoice issued either by the manufacturer or by the dealer of the
vehicle includ ing the excise duty, surcharge or cess, Goods and Services Tax
etc., as payable in the State of Karnataka whichever is higher; and
(d) In respect of an imported motor vehicle, irrespective of its place of
manufacture, the total cost incurred in importing the vehicle, that is to say, the
value of the motor vehicle as endorsed in the bill of entry or such other
document and assessed as such under the Customs Act, 1962, together with
the customs duty levied freight charges incurred and other taxes levied there
upon including additional duty/penalty levied if any, by the Customs
Department or any other Department.”

(2) after part C7 the following new part shall be inserted, namely: -

“Part C8
{See Section 7 (3)}
Refund Table for Combined Harvester Vehicles

Sl. No.

(1) If after the Registration removal of
vehicle or cancellation of
Registration of vehicle taken place.
(2) Percentage of Life Time Tax
Paid to be Refunded
(3)
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%

After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 1 0 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil"

By order and in t he name of
the Governor of Karnataka

(K. DWARAKANATH BABU)
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary Affairs
and Legislation

KARNATAKA ACT NO. 18 OF 202 2
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 31st day of March , 2022)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2022
(Received the assent of the Governor on the 31st day of March, 2022)

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Ka rnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purpose hereinafter appearing:
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the seventy third year of the
Republic of India as follows:

1. Short title and commencement : (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force with effect from 1st April 2022.

2. Amendment of section 4. - In the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957,
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) in section 4, in sub -section (1), -
(i) for the words “fifteen days” the words “a month” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub -section (1) before the first proviso the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely: -
“Provided that the tax in respect of vehicl e to be paid quarterly amounting to Rupees
thirty thousand and above may be paid monthly on prorata basis before the expiry of validity
of tax and subject to such condition as may be specified by the Government from time to
time.”
(iii) after so inserting, in the existing first proviso for the words “Provided that” the
words “Provided further that” shall be substituted.

By Order and in the name of
the Governor of Karnataka,

G. SRIDHAR
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary
Affairs and Legisl ation

KARNATAKA ACT NO. 31 OF 202 3

(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 2 8th day of July, 202 3)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2023

(Received the assent of the Governor on the 27th day of July, 2023 )

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation
Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purpose hereinafter appearing:
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the seventy fourth year of the
Republic of India as follows:
1. Short title and commencement .- (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka
Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. Amendment of the Schedule. - In the Schedule to the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the
Principal Act), -
(1) in Part 'A', -
(i) in item No. 2, for the words "Invalid carriages", the words "invalid
carriages/Adapted vehicle/Divyangjan (availing GST Concession)"
shall be substituted;
(ii) in item 3, in sub -item (1), clause (c) and entries relating thereto shall be
omitted;
(iii) in item No. 8, in sub -item (f), -
(a) in clause (i), in colum n (2), for the figures "20.00", the
figures “100.00 ” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (ii), in column (2), for the figures "80.00", the
figures “200.00 ” shall be substituted;
(2) for PART A6 of the Principal Act, the following shall be substitute d, namely: -

“PART A6
(see section 3(1))
Life time tax for goods vehicles having gross vehicle weight exceeding 1,500 Kgs.
But not exceeding 12,000 Kgs. In weight laden, whether used for hire or reward or
not.
Item
No. Class of Vehicles Goods
vehicle
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
Kgs.
And not
exceeding
Kgs.
Rs. Goods
vehicle
having gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
2000Kgs.
And not
exceeding
3000Kgs.Rs. Goods
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
3,000Kgs.
And not
exceeding
5,500 Kgs.
Rs. Goods
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
5,500Kgs.
And not
exceeding
7,500Kgs.
Rs. Goods
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
7,500Kgs.
And not
exceeding
9,500Kgs.
Rs. Goods
vehicles
having gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
9,500Kgs.
And not
exceeding
12,000Kgs.
Rs.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
A At the time of
Registration of New
Vehicle 20,000 30,000 40,000 60,000 80,000 1,00,000
B If the vehicle is
already registered
and its age from
the month of
Registration is:
Not more than 2
years 18600 27900 37200 55800 74400 93000
More than 2 Years
but not more than 3
Years 17400 26400 35400 53400 71400 89400
More than 3 Years
but not more than 4
Years 16200 24900 33600 51000 68400 85800
More than 4 Years
but not more th an 5
Years 15000 23400 31800 48600 65400 82200
More than 5 Years
but not more than 6
Years 13800 21900 30000 46200 62400 78600
More than 6 Years
but not more than
Years 12800 20600 28400 44200 59600 75200
More than 7 Years
but not more than 8
Years 11800 19300 26800 42200 56800 71800
More than 8 Years
but not more than 9
Years 10800 18000 25200 40200 54000 68400
More than 9 Years
but not more than
Years 9800 16700 23600 38200 51200 65000
More than 10 Years
but not more than
Years 9000 15600 22200 36600 48600 61800

More than 11 Years
but not more than
Years 8200 14500 20800 35000 46000 58600
More than 12 Years
but not more than
Years 7400 13400 19400 33400 43400 55400
More than 13 Years
but not more than
Years 6600 12300 18000 31800 40800 52200
More than 14 Years
but not more than
Years 5800 11200 16600 30200 38200 49000
More than 15 years 5000 10100 15200 28600 35600 45800
”
(3) for Part A8 of the Principal Act, the following shall be substituted, n amely: -

“PART A8
(see section 3(1))
Life time Tax for Motor Cabs other than those registered out - side the State and
covered with the permit issued under sub -section (9) of section 88 of the Motor
Vehicle Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988).

Sl
No Class of vehicles Cost of the vehicle which
exceeds Rs. 10 Lakhs but
does not exceeding
Rs. 15 Lakhs Cost of the vehicle
which exceeds Rs. 15
Lakhs

A At the time of Registration of New
Vehicles 9% of the cost of the vehicle 15% of the cost of the
vehicle
B If the vehicle is already registered and
its age from the month of Registration
is: Percentage of the Life Time
Tax levied under Clause A Percentage of the Life
Time Tax levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93% 93%
More than 2 Years but not more than
Years 87% 87%
More than 3 Years but not more than
Years 81% 81%
More than 4 Years but not more than
Years 75% 75%
More than 5 Years but not more than
Years 69% 69%
More than 6 Years but not more than
Years 64% 64%
More t han 7 Years but not more than
Years 59% 59%
More than 8 Years but not more than
Years 54% 54%
More than 9 Years but not more than
Years 49% 49%
More than 10 Years but not more than
Years 45% 45%
More than 11 Years but not more than
Years 41% 41%
More than 12 Years but not more than 37% 37%

Years
More than 13 Years but not more than
Years 33% 33%
More than 14 Years but not more than
Years 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25%
Notes:
(1) In respect of vehicles f or which tax was due prior to the 1st day of April, 2012, but
has not been paid, such tax shall be collected at the rates prevailing prior to such
day along with the penalty due, if any.
(2) In its order dated 08 -10-2012 passed in WP No. 33654 -58/2012, the Hon ’ble
High Court of Karnataka has granted two installments for payment of the tax: The
first installment is payable before 31 -12-2012 and the Second Installment is
payable before 31 -03-2013. This concession is available only to vehicles
registered prior to 01-04-2012.
(3) Cost of the vehicle in relation to motor vehicle means, -
(a) In respect of a vehicle manufactured in India, cost of the vehicle as per
the purchase invoice issued either by the manufacturer or by the
dealer of the vehicle including the excise d uty, surcharge or cess,
Goods and Services Tax etc., as payable in the State of Karnataka
whichever is higher; and
(b) In respect of an imported motor vehicle, irrespective of its place of
manufacture, the total cost incurred in importing the vehicle, that is to
say, the value of the motor vehicle as endorsed in the Bill of Entry or
such other document and assessed as such under the Customs Act.
1962, together with the Customs Duty levied, freight charges incurred
and other taxes levied thereupon including additional duty or penalty
levied if any, by the Customs Department or any other Department.”
(4) for Part C5 of the Principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely: -
“PART C5
(see section 7(3))
Refund table for goods vehicles having gross veh icle weight exceeding 1,500 Kgs.
But not exceeding 12,000 Kgs. in respect of which lifetime tax is paid under Part
A6
Item
No. Class of
Vehicles Goods
vehicle
having gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
Kgs.
And not Goods vehicle
having gross
vehicle weight
exceeding
2000Kgs. And
not exceeding
3000Kgs.Rs. Goods
vehicles
having gross
vehicle weight
exceeding
3,000Kgs. And
not exceeding
5,500Kgs. Rs. Goods
vehicles
having gross
vehicle weight
exceeding
5,500Kgs. And
not exceeding
7,500 Kgs. Rs. Goods vehicles
having gross
vehicle weight
exceeding
7,500Kgs. And
not exceeding
9,500Kgs. Rs. Goods
vehicles
having gross
vehicle weight
exceeding
9,500Kgs. And
not exceeding
12,000Kgs.

exceeding
Kgs.
Rs. Rs.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Within a year 18600 27900 37200 55800 74400 93000
After 1 year but
within 2 years 17400 26400 35400 53400 71400 89400
After 2 year but
within 3 years 16200 24900 33600 51000 68400 85800
After 3 year but
within 4 years 15000 23400 31800 48600 65400 82200
After 4 year but
within 5 years 13800 21900 30000 46200 62400 78600
After 5 year but
within 6 years 12800 20600 28400 44200 59600 75200
After 6 year but
within 7 years 11800 19300 26800 42200 56800 71800
After 7 year but
within 8 years 10800 18000 25200 40200 54000 68400
After 8 year but
within 9 years 9800 16700 23600 38200 51200 65000
After 9 year but
within 10 years 9000 15600 22200 36600 48600 61800
After 10 year but
within 11 years 8200 14500 20800 35000 46000 58600
After 11 year but
within 12 years 7400 13400 19400 33400 43400 55400
After 12 year but
within 13 years 6600 12300 18000 31800 40800 52200
After 13 year but
within 14 years 5800 11200 16600 30200 38200 49000
After 14 year but
within 15 years 4200 9000 13800 27000 33000 42600
After 15 years Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil

(5) for Part C7 of the Principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely: -
"PART C7
(see section 7(3))
Refund Table for Motor Cab cost of which exceeds Rs 10 Lakhs
Sl. No. If after the registration removal of vehicles
or cancellation of Registration of vehicle
taken place. Percentage of Life Time
Tax paid to be refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 y ear but within 4 years 75%

After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but wi thin 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 yea rs Nil

3. Power to remove difficulty. - (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2023 the State
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provis ions as
may appear to it be necessary or expedient for the purposes removing difficulty:
Provided that, no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of commencement of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation
(Amendment) Act, 2023.

(2) Every order made under sub -section (1) shall, as soon as after it is made, be
laid before the State Legislature.

By Order and in the name of
the Governor of Karnataka,

G.SRIDHAR
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary
Affairs and Legislation

ORDER No. TD 03 TDR 2023/Part -1,
Bengaluru, Dated: 30.08.2023.

In exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2023, the Government of Karnataka hereby
makes the following or der to remove the difficulties in the implementation of the
provisions of section 3 of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957), namely: -

1. Title and Commencement. - (1) This order may be called the Karnataka
Motor Vehicl es Taxation (Power to remove difficulties) Order, 2023.

(2) It shall come into force from the date of commencement of the Karnataka
Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2023.

2. Amendment of section 3. - In the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
(Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) (herein after referred to as the Principal Act) in
letters “5,500 kgs” the figures and letters “12,000 kgs” shall be substituted; an d (ii) in
clause (d), for the words “fifteen lakhs” the words “ten lakhs” shall be substituted.

3. Amendment of section 4. - In the Principal Act, in section 4, in sub section
(1),-
(i) in the fourth proviso, for the words “Rupees fifteen lakhs” the wor ds
“Rupees ten lakhs” shall be substituted. 3

(ii) In the fifth proviso, for the figure s and letters “3,000 kgs” and “1st day of
April 2007”the figures and letters “12,000 kgs” and “1st day of April 2023” shall
respectively be substituted.

By order and in the name of the
Governor of Karnataka

(PUSHPA V.S.)
Under Secretary to Government,
Department of Transport

Whereas a tax at the rates specified in Part A of the Schedule is levied on all
Motor Vehicles suitable for use on roads under section 3 of th e Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957).

Whereas in clause (aa) of the fifth proviso to sub -section (1) of section 3 of
the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957), tax is
levied at the rat es specified in Part A6 of the Schedule, in case of goods vehicles
having gross vehicle weight exceeding 1,500 kgs but not exceeding 5,500 kgs in
weight laden, whether used for hire or reward or not.

Whereas in clause (d) of sub -section (1) of section 3 of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957), tax is levied at the rates
specified in Part A8 of the Schedule in the case of Motor Cabs the cost of which
exceeds rupees fifteen lakhs other than those registered outside the State and
covered with a permit issued under sub -section (9) of section 88 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988).

Whereas Part A6 of the Schedule of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation
Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957), has been s ubstituted by the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2023 wherein lifetime tax for goods vehicles
having gross vehicle weight exceeding 1,500 kgs but not exceeding 12,000 kgs in
weight laden, whether used for hire or reward or not has been specified.

Whereas Part A8 of the Schedule of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation
Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957), has been substituted by the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2023 wherein Life time tax for motor cabs other
than those registered outside the State and covered with the permit issued under
sub-section (9) of section 88 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of
1988) has been specified.

Whereas the following difficulties had arisen in giving effect to th e provisions
of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2023 (Karnataka Act 31
of 2023) namely: -

(i) Lifetime tax for goods vehicles having gross vehicle weight exceeding 5,500
kgs in weight laden, whether used for hire or reward or not;
(ii) Lifetime tax for motor cabs the cost of which exceeds rupees ten lakhs; and
(iii) Other consequential amendments to section 4.
Whereas to remove the above difficulties, the Government had issued the
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Power to remove difficulties ) Order, 2023 vide
Order No:TD 03 TDR 2023/Part -1, dated:30.08.2023 published in the Karnataka
Gazette Extra -ordinary dated:30.08.2023.

Whereas the Government has received representations from several
Transport Operators Associations regarding difficul ties faced in payment of Lifetime
Tax under the provisions of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment)
Act, 2023 and have urged for postponement of tax payment and facility of paying tax
in installments.

Whereas the approval of the Finance Depa rtment has obtained in the
endorsement No. FD 325 EXP -11/2023 dated:02.09.2023 and No.FD 344 EXP 11/2023 dated:04.09.2023.

In the above circumstances the Government of Karnataka hereby clarifies as
under, -

ORDER (2) NO.TD 133 TDO 2023, Bangalore, Dated :08.09. 2023.

In exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2023, (Karnataka Act 31 of 2023) the
Government of Karnataka hereby clarifies that, -

“The provisions of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act,
2023, (Karnataka Act 31 of 2023), shall come into force with effect from 1st day of
November, 2023.

Note:
(i) In case of new vehicle to be registered, tax levied shall be paid in full
at the time of registration and in case of alrea dy registered goods
vehicles having Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW) exceeding 1500 kgs but
not exceeding 12000 kgs levied under Part A6 of the Schedule and
already registered motor cabs levied under Part A8 of the Schedule,
the lifetime tax levied may be paid i n two equal installments, in the
following manner, namely: -

(a) Out of the tax so levied, half of the amount shall be paid at the
time of tax due; and

(b) The balance of tax shall be paid within five months from the date
of payment of the first install ment.

(ii) For goods vehicles and motor cabs due for payment of tax under Part A of the Schedule before the date of commencement of the Karnataka
Motor Vehicles Taxation ( Amendment ) Act, 2023 (Karnataka Act 31 of
2023) shall pay taxes without penalty till 31st day of October, 2023.

(iii) The registered owner who has paid the tax in part under clause (i) of
third proviso of sub -section (3) of section 4 shall not be entitled for a
refund of tax, unless the tax is paid in full”

By order and in the name of the
Governor of Karnataka

(PUSHPA V.S.)
Under Secretary to Government,
Department of Transport.

KARNATAKA ACT NO. 34 OF 202 3

(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 30th day of December, 2023)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXAT ION (SECOND
AMENDMENT) ACT, 2023

(Received the assent of the Governor on the 30th day of December , 2023 )

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
1957.

Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Tax ation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purpose
hereinafter appearing:

Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the seventy fourth
year of the Republic of India as follows:

1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be cal led the
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Second Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force with effect from 01 -01-2024.

2. Amendment of section 3 .- In the Karnataka Motor Vehicles
Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) (hereinafter refer red to as the
Principal Act), in section 3 in sub -section (1), in the fifth proviso, -
(i) in clause (aa), for the figures and letters "5500 kgs", the
figures and letters "12,000 kgs'" shall be substituted;
and
(ii) in clause (d), for the words " fifteen", the wor ds " ten"
shall be substituted.
3. Amendment of section 4. - In section 4 of the Principal Act, in sub section (1), -

(i) in the fourth proviso, for the words "Rupees fifteen
lakhs", the words "Rupees ten lakhs" shall be
substituted;
(ii) in the fifth proviso for the figures and letters "3000
kgs" and "1st day of April, 2007" the figures and letters
"12,000 kgs" and letters "1st day of January, 2024"
shall be substituted respectively;
(iii)in sub -section (3), after the second proviso, the
following shall be inserted, namel y:-

"Provided also that, in case of new vehicle registered or
other State goods vehicles migrating to this State
having GVW exceeding 1500kgs but not exceeding
kgs, tax levied shall be levied under Part -A6.

Provided also that, in case of new veh icle registered or
other State motor cab vehicles migrating to this State
tax shall be levied under Part -A8."

4. Amendment of section 7. - In Section 7 of the Principal Act, in sub section (3), after the second proviso, the following shall be inserted, namel y:-
"Provided further that, the registered owner who has paid the tax in part
under clause (i) of third proviso of sub -section (3) of section 4 shall not be
entitled for a refund of tax, unless the tax is paid in full".

5. Amendment of Schedule. - In the Schedule to the Principal Act, -
(1) In Part -A:-
(i) In item 2 for figures, letter and words “invalid
carriage”, the figures, letter and words “invalid
carriage/Adapted vehicle/ Divyangjan (availing GST
Concession)” shall be substituted;
(ii) In item 3, in sub -item (1), clause (c) after the figures
and letters "12,000 kgs", the words “ already registered
vehicles in the state” shall be inserted;
(iii) In item 4, in sub -item (1), before the word "Vehicles",
the words, “ Already registered in the state” shall be
inserted;
(iv) In item 8, clause (f), sub -item (i), for figures, "20" the
figures, "100" shall be substituted; and
(v) In item 8, clause (f), sub -item (ii), for figures, "80" the
figures, "200" shall be substituted.
(2) For Part A5 and the entries relating thereto, the foll owing shall be
substituted, namely: -
“PART A5
(See Section 3(1))
Lifetime Tax for Motor cars, Jeeps, Omni Buses and Private Service
Vehicles.
Sl No Class of vehicles Motor cars, Jeeps,
Omni Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles having
floor area up to 5
Sq. M trs, cost of
which does not
exceed Rs. 5
Lakhs. Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles
having floor
area up to 5
Sq. Mtrs, cost
of which
exceedsRs 5
Lakhs but does
not exceeding
Rs.10
Lakhs Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private
Service
Vehicles
having floor
area up to 5
Sq. Mtrs,
cost of
which
exceeds Rs10
Lakhs but
does not
exceeding
Rs20 Lakhs Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles having
floor area up to
Sq. Mtrs, cost
of which
exceeds
Rs.20 Lakhs.
2 3 4 5 6
A At the time of Registration
of New Vehicle 13 % of cost of
the Vehicle 14 % of the
cost of the
Vehicle 17% of the
cost of the
Vehicle 18% of the
cost of the
Vehicle

B If the vehicle is already
registered and its age from
the month of Registration
is: Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93% 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years but not
more than 3 Years 87% 87% 87% 87%
More than 3 Years but not
more than 4 Years 81% 81% 81% 81%
More than 4 Years but not
more than 5 Years 75% 75% 75% 75%
More than 5 Years but not
more than 6 Years 69% 69% 69% 69%
More than 6 Years but not
more than 7 Years 64% 64% 64% 64%
More than 7 Years but not
more than 8 Years 59% 59% 59% 59%
More than 8 Years but not
more than 9 Years 54% 54% 54% 54%
More than 9 Years but not
more than 10 Years 49% 49% 49% 49%
More than 10 Years but
not more than 11 Years 45% 45% 45% 45%
More than 11 Years but
not more than 12 Years 41% 41% 41% 41%
More than 12 Years but
not more than 13 Years 37% 37% 37% 37%
More than 13 Years but
not more than 14 Years 33% 33% 33% 33%
More than 14 Years but
not more than 15 Years 29% 29% 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25% 25% 25%

(3) For Part A6 and the entries relating the reto, the following shall be
substituted, namely: -
“PART A6
(See Section 3(1))
Life time tax for goods vehicles having gross vehicle weight exceeding
1,500 Kgs. But not exceeding 12,000 Kgs. In weight laden, whether
used for hire or reward or not.
Item
No. Class of
Vehicles Goods
vehicle
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
Kgs.
and not
exceeding Goods
vehicle
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
2000Kgs.
and not
exceeding Goods
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
3,000Kgs.
and not
exceeding Goods
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
5,500Kgs.
and not
exceeding Goods
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
7,500Kgs.
and not
exceeding Goods
vehicles
having
gross
vehicle
weight
exceeding
9,500Kgs.
and not
exceeding

Kgs. 3000Kgs. 5,500Kgs. 7,500Kgs. 9,500Kgs. 12,000Kgs.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
A At the time of
Registration of
New Vehicle 20,000 30,000 40,000 60,000 80,000 1,00,000
B If the vehicle
is already
registered and
its age from
the month of
Registration
is: Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A
Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A
Not more than
years 93% 93% 93% 93% 93% 93%
More than 2
Years but not
more than 3
Years 87% 87% 87% 87% 87% 87%
More than 3
Years but not
more than 4
Years 81% 81% 81% 81% 81% 81%
More than 4
Years but not
more than 5
Years 75% 75% 75% 75% 75% 75%
More than 5
Years but not
more than 6
Years
69% 69% 69% 69% 69% 69%
More than 6
Years but not
more than 7
Years 64% 64% 64% 64% 64% 64%
More than 7
Years but not
more than 8
Years 59% 59% 59% 59% 59% 59%
More than 8
Years but not
more than 9
Years 54% 54% 54% 54% 54% 54%
More than 9
Years but not
more than 10
Years 49% 49% 49% 49% 49% 49%
More than 10
Years but not
more than 11
Years 45% 45% 45% 45% 45% 45%
More than 11
Years but not
more than 12
Years 41% 41% 41% 41% 41% 41%
More than 12
Years but not 37% 37% 37% 37% 37% 37%

more than 13
Years
More than 13
Years but not
more than 14
Years 33% 33% 33% 33% 33% 33%
More than 14
Years but not
more than 15
Years 29% 29% 29% 29% 29% 29%
More than 15
years 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25%

(4) For Part A8 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
substituted, namely: -
“PART A8
(See section 3(1))
Lifetime Tax for Motor Cab s other than those registered out - side the
State and covered with the permit issued under sub -section (9) of
Sl No Class of vehicles Cost of the vehicle which
exceeds Rs. 10
Lakhs but does not
exceeding Rs. 15 Lakhs Cost of the vehicle
which exceeds
Rs. 15 Lakhs

A At the time of
Registration of New
Vehicles 9% of the cost of the vehicle 15% of the cost of the
vehicle
B If the vehicle is already
registered and its age
from the month of
Registration is: Percentage of the Life Time
Tax levied under Clause A Percentage of the Life
Time Tax levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93% 93%
More than 2 Years but
not more than 3 Years 87% 87%
More than 3 Years but
not more than 4 Years 81% 81%
More than 4 Years but
not more than 5 Years 75% 75%
More than 5 Years but
not more than 6 Years 69% 69%
More than 6 Years but
not more than 7 Years 64% 64%
More than 7 Years but
not more than 8 Years 59% 59%
More than 8 Years but
not more than 9 Years 54% 54%
More than 9 Years but
not more than 10
Years 49% 49%

More than 10 Years
but not more than 11
Years 45% 45%
More than 11 Years
but not more than 12
Years 41% 41%
More than 12 Years
but not more than 13
Years 37% 37%
More than 13 Years
but not more than 14
Years 33% 33%
More than 14 Years
but not more than 15
Years 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25%

(5) For Part C5 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
substituted, namely: -
“PART C5
(See Section 7(3))
Refund table for goods vehicles having gross vehicle weight
exceeding 1,500 Kgs. But not exceeding 12,000 Kgs. in respect of
which lifetime tax is paid under Part A6

Sl. No. If after the registration re moval of
vehicles or cancellation of
Registration of vehicle taken place. Percentage of Life
Time Tax paid to be
refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 ye ars 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil

(6) For P art C7 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
substituted, namely: -

“PART C7
(See section 7(3))
Refund Table for Motor Cab cost of which exceeds Rs 10 Lakhs
Sl.No. If after the registration removal of
vehicles or cancellation of
Registrat ion of vehicle taken place. Percentage of Life
Time Tax paid to be
refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil

6. Repeal. - The Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Ame ndment) Act,
(Karnataka Act 31 of 2023) is hereby repealed.
7. Power to remove difficulty. - (1) If any difficulty arises in giving
effect to the provisions of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Second
Amendment) Act, 2023 the State Government ma y, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions as may appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for purpose of removing the difficulty:
Provided that, no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period
of two years from the date o f commencement of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxatio n (Second Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) Every order made under sub -section (1), shall as soon as after it is
made, be laid before the State Legislature.
By Order and in the name of
the Governor of Karnatak a,

G. SRIDHAR
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary
Affairs and Legislation

KARNATAKA ACT NO.12 OF 202 4
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 07th day of March 2024)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMEN DMENT) ACT,

(Received the assent of the Governor on the 06th day of March 2024 )

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
1957.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation Act, 1 957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purpose
hereinafter appearing:
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the seventy fifth
year of the Republic of India as follows:
1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the
Karnat aka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. Amendment of Section 3 .- In the Karnataka Motor Vehicles
Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as
Principal Act), in section 3, in sub-section (1), in the fourth proviso, for
clause (c), the following shall be substituted, namely: -
“(c) In case of Construction Equipment Vehicles (as defined in
clause (cab) of rule 2 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989)
and vehicles fitted with a ir compressor and generator, tax shall be
levied at the rates specified in Part - A7 of the schedule .”
3. Amendment of section 3 -A.- In the Principal Act, in section 3 -A,
after sub -section (1) the following shall be inserted, namely: -
“(1A) In addition to the existing cess of the tax levied under
Vehicles Act,1988 (Central Act 59 0f 1988), 3% additional cess
shall be levied and collected on the transport vehicles for the
purpose of the Karnataka M otor Transport and Other Allied
Workers Social Security and Welfare Fund .”

4. Amendment of schedule .-In the Schedule to the Principal Act, -
(i) For Part A5 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall
be substituted, namely: -

“PART A5
{See Section 3 (1)}
Lifetime Tax for Motor cars, Jeeps, Omni Buses and Private Service
Vehicles.

Sl
No Class of vehicles Motor cars, Jeeps,
Omni Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles having
floor area up to 5
Sq. Mtrs, cost of
which does not
exceeds
Rs. 5 Lakhs Motor cars , Jeeps,
Omni Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles having
floor area up to 5
Sq. Mtrs, cost of
which exceeds
Rs.5 Lakhs but
does not exceeds
Rs.10Lakhs Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles having
floor area up to
Sq. Mtrs, cost
of which exceeds
Rs.10 Lakhs but
does not
exceeds Rs.20
Lakhs Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles
having floor
area up to 5
Sq. Mtrs,
cost of which
exceeds
Rs.20 Lakhs Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles run on
Electricity
having cost of
the vehicle
which exceeds
Rs.25 Lakhs
2 3 4 5 6 7
A At the time of
Registration of New
Vehicle 13 % of cost of
the Vehicle 14 % of the cost of
the Vehicle 17% of the cost of
the Vehicle 18% of the cost
of the Vehicle 10% of the cost
of the Vehicle
B If the vehicle is
already registered
and its age from
the month of
Registration is: Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under Clause
A Percentage of the
Life Time Tax levied
under Clause A Percentage of t he
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause A Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2
years 93% 93% 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years
but not more than
Years
87% 87% 87% 87% 87%
More than 3 Years
but not more than
Years 81% 81% 81% 81% 81%
More than 4 Years
but not more than
Years 75% 75% 75% 75% 75%
More than 5 Years
but not more than
Years 69% 69% 69% 69% 69%
More than 6 Years
but not more
than7 Years 64% 64% 64% 64% 64%
More than 7 Years
but not more than
Years 59% 59 59% 59% 59%
More than 8 Years
but not more than
Years 54% 54% 54% 54% 54%
More than 9 Years
but not more
than10 Years 49% 49% 49% 49% 49%
More than10 Years
but not more
than11 Years 45% 45% 45% 45% 45%
More than 11
Years but not
more than12
Years 41% 41% 41% 41% 41%

More than12
Years but not
more than13
Years 37% 37% 37% 37% 37%
More than13
Years but not
more than 14
Years 33% 33% 33% 33% 33%
More tha n14
Years but not
more than 15
Years 29% 29% 29% 29% 29%
More than15
years
25% 25% 25% 25% 25%
(ii) In Part A7, for the heading “Lifetime Tax for Construction Equipment
Vehicles (As defined under Rule 2(ca) of the Central Motor Vehicle
Rules, 1989) and vehicles fitted with Air Compressor and Generators”
the heading “Lifetime Tax for Construction Equipment Vehicles (As
defined under clause (cab) of rule 2 of the Central Motor Vehicle
Rules,1989) and vehicles fitted with Air Compressor and Generators”
shall be substituted.

(iii) In Part C6, for the heading “ Refund Table for Construction Equipment
Vehicles (As defined under Rule 2(ca) of Central Motor Vehicle Rules,
1989) and vehicles fitted with Air Compressor or Generators ” the
heading “Refund Table for Construction Equipment Vehicles (As
defined under clause (cab) of rule 2 of the Central Motor Vehicle
Rules, 1989) and vehicles fitted with Air Compressor or Generators”
shall be substituted.

5. Power to remove difficulty. -(1) If any difficulty arises in giving
effect to the provisions of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation
(Amendment) Act, 2024, the State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions as may appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for purpose of removin g the difficulty:

Provided that, no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period
of two years from the date of commencement of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2024.

(2) Every order made under sub -section (1), shall as soo n as after it is
made, be laid before the State Legislature.

By Order and in the name of
the Governor of Karnataka,

G. SRIDHAR
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary
Affairs and Legislation
KARNATAKA ACT NO. 03 OF 202 5
(First Published in t he Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 09th day of January 2025)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (SECOND AMENDMENT)
ACT, 2024

(Received the assent of the Governor on the 08th day of January 2025 )

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purpose
hereinafter appearing:
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the seventy fifth
year of the Republic of India as follows: -
1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Second Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force from such date as the State Government may,
by notifi cation in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. Amendment of section 3A. - In the Karnataka Motor Vehicles
Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) in section 3A, after sub section (1A), the following shall be inserted, namely: -
“(1B) In Addition to the existing cess of the tax levied under section 3
on the Motor Vehicles registered under the provisions of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988), additional cess of Rupees Five Hundred
for two wheeler and Rupees One Thousand for Motor Cars shall be levied
and collected on the non -transport vehicles at the time of registration for the
purpose of the Karnataka Motor Transport and other Allied Workers Social
Security and Welfare Fund.

Explanation: For the purpose of this sub -section ‘non -transp ort
vehicles’ means as specified by a Notification by the Central Government
under the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.”
3. Power to remove difficulty. - (1) If any difficulty arises in giving
effect to the provisions of the Karnataka Motor Vehi cles Taxation (Second
Amendment) Act, 2024, the State Government may by notification in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions as may appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for purpose of removing the difficulty:
Provided that, no such order shall b e made after the expiry of a period
of two years from the date of commencement of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Second Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) Every order made under sub -section (1), shall as soon as after it is
made, be laid before the State Le gislature.

By Order and in the name of
the Governor of Karnataka,

G. SRIDHAR
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary
Affairs and Legislation

KARNATAKA ACT NO. 24 OF 202 5
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 4th day of April 2025)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT) ACT,

(Receive d the assent of the Governor on the 3rd day of April 2025)

An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
1957.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for th e purpose
hereinafter appearing:
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the seventy sixth
year of the Republic of India as follows: -
1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment ) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force from such date as the State Government may,
by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. Amendment of section 3 .- In section 3 of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) (hereinafter referred
to as the Principal Act) , in sub -section (1), in the fifth proviso, in clause (d),
the words “the cost of which exceeds rupees ten Lakhs” shall be omitted.
3. Amendment of section 4. - In section 4 of the Principal Act, in sub section (1), in the fifth proviso, the words “the cost of which exceeds rupees
ten Lakhs” shall be omitted.
4. Amendment of the Schedule. - In the schedule of the Principal
Act,-
(i) for Part A7 except Notes, the following shall be substituted,
namely: -
“PART A7
(see section 3(1))

Lifetime Tax for Construction Equipment Vehicles (As defined under
clause (cab) of rule 2 of the Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989) and
vehicles fitted with Air Compressor and Generators

Sl No Class of vehicles Percentage of Tax Levi ed on
Construction Equipment
Vehicles
A At the time of Registration of New Vehicles 8 percent of cost of the vehicle
B If the vehicle is already registered and its age
from the month of Registration is: Percentage of the Life Time
Tax levied under Clau se A
Not more than 2 years 93%
More than 2 Years but not more than 3 Years 87%
More than 3 Years but not more than 4 Years 81%
More than 4 Years but not more than 5 Years 75%
More than 5 Years but not more than 6 Years 69%
More than 6 Yea rs but not more than 7 Years 64%
More than 7 Years but not more than 8 Years 59%
More than 8 Years but not more than 9 Years 54%
More than 9 Years but not more than 10 Years 49%
More than 10 Years but not more than 11 Years 45%
More than 1 1 Years but not more than 12 Years 41%
More than 12 Years but not more than 13 Years 37%
More than 13 Years but not more than 14 Years 33%
More than 14 Years but not more than 15 Years 29%
More than 15 years 25%

(ii) for Part A8, the fol lowing shall be substituted, namely: -

“PART A8
(see section 3(1))

Life time Tax for Motor Cabs other than those registered out -side the State
and covered with the permit issued under sub -section (9) of section 88 of the
Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988).

Sl
No Class of vehicles Cost of the vehicle
which does not
exceeds Rs. 10
Lakhs Cost of the vehicle
which exceeds Rs. 10
Lakhs but does not
exceeding Rs. 15
Lakhs Cost of the
vehicle which
exceeds Rs. 15
Lakhs
Motor Cabs
which run o n
Electricity
having cost of
the vehicle
which exceed
Rs. 25 Lakhs
A At the time of
Registration of New
Vehicles 5 % of the cost of
the vehicle 9% of the cost of
the vehicle 15% of the
cost of the
vehicle 10% of the
cost of the
vehicle
B If the vehicle is
already registered
and its age from
the month of
Registration is: Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause
A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2
years 93% 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years
but not more than
Years 87% 87% 87% 87%
More than 3 Years
but not more than
Years 81% 81% 81% 81%
More than 4 Years
but not more than
Years 75% 75% 75% 75%
More than 5 Years
but not more than
Years 69% 69% 69% 69%
More than 6 Years
but not more than
Years 64% 64% 64% 64%
More than 7 Years
but not more than
Years 59% 59% 59% 59%
More than 8 Years
but not more than
Years 54% 54% 54% 54%
More than 9 Years
but not more than
Years 49% 49% 49% 49%
More than 10 Years
but not more than
Years 45% 45% 45% 45%
More than 11 Years
but not more than
Years 41% 41% 41% 41%
More than 12 Years
but not more than 37% 37% 37% 37%

Years
More than 13 Years
but not more than
Years 33% 33% 33% 33%
More than 14 Years
but not more than
Years 29% 29% 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25% 25% 25%
”
(iii) for Part C7, the following shall be substituted, namely: -

"PART C7
(see section 7(3))
Refund Table for Motor Cab

Sl. No. If after the registration removal of
vehicles or cancellation of Registration
of vehicle taken place. Percentage of Life Time
Tax paid to be refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but with in 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil
”

5. Power to remove difficulty. - (1) If any difficulty arises in giving
effect to the provisions of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation
(Amendment) Act, 2025 the Stat e Government may, by order published in

the Official Gazette, make such provisions as may appear to it be necessary
or expedient for the purposes removing difficulty:

Provided that, no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period
of two years fro m the date of commencement of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2025.

(2) Every order made under sub -section (1) shall, as soon as after it is
made, be laid before the State Legislature.

By Order and in the name of
the Governor of K arnataka,

G. SRIDHAR
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary
Affairs and Legislation

ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಸರ್ಕಾರ
[

KARNATAKA ACT 29 OF 2026
(First published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra -ordinary on the 10th day of April, 2026)

THE KARNATAKA MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION (AMENDMENT) ACT,

(Received the assent of the Governor on the 9th day of April, 2026)

An Act fur ther to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
1957.
Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purpose
hereinafter appearing:

Be it enacted by the Karnataka Sta te Legislature in the seventy
seventh year of the Republic of India, as follows: -

1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force from such date as the State Government may,
by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.

2. Amendment of section 3. - In section 3 of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) (hereinafter referred
to as the Principal Act) , in sub -section ( 1), after fourth proviso, in
Explanation -2, for the words, letters and figures “Parts A1, A2, A4, A5, A6,
A7 and A8”, the words, letters and figures “Parts A1, A2, A2(a), A4, A5,
A5(a), A6, A7, A8, A8(a), A9 and A10” shall be substituted.

3. Amendment of section 4 .- In section 4 of the Principal Act , in
sub-section (3), after fourth proviso, the following shall be inserted, namely: -
“Provided also that, in case of new vehicle registered or other State
vehicles migrating to this State, tax shall be levied a s per the schedule Part A.”

4. Amendment of section 7. - In section 7 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (3), after the word, letter and figure “Part C8”, the words,
letters, figures and brackets “Part C1(a), Part C4(a) and Part C7(a)” shall be
inserte d;

5. Amendment of schedule. - In the Schedule to the Principal Act, -
(1) in Part A, -
(i) (a) in item no. 03, after the words "cash van", the words
"already registered Commercial Tractor Trailers in the
State" shall be inserted;
(b) for item no. 05( a) and the entr ies relating thereto, the
following shall be substituted, namely: -
“

5(a)(i) Motor vehicles (Contract carriages) plying for hire or reward
and constructed or adopted to carry more than 20
passengers (excluding driver and conductor or attendant)
and comply with rule 151(2) of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Rules, 1989, for every passenger.
1500.00
(ii) Motor vehicles (Contract carriages) plying for hire or reward
and constructed or adopted to carry more than 12
passengers but not more than 20 passengers (excluding
driver and conductor or attendant)other than those liable
to be taxed under item 5(a)(i) for every passengers.

1500.00
(iii) Motor vehicles (Contract carriages) plying for hire or reward
and constructed or adopted to carry more than 20
passengers (excluding driver and conductor or
attendant)other than those liable to be taxed under item
5(a) (i) for every passengers.

2000.00
(iv) Motor vehicles (LMV -Contract carriages) plying for hire o r
reward and constructed or adopted to carry more than 12
passengers but not more than 20 passengers (excluding
driver and conductor or attendant) which are converted
from maxi cab where registered/ conversion on or before
28-05-2021 and comply with rule 1 51(2) of the Karnataka
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 for every passenger.

700.00
”
(c) for item no 06 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall
be substituted, namely: -

“
(a) Motor Vehicles (luxury buses) plying for hire or reward,
constructed or adapted to carry more than 12 passengers
(excluding driver and conductor or attendant) and comply
with rule 128 of the Central Motor Vehicles rules, 1989, or
Motor Vehicles with permits granted under Rule 82 to 85 -A
of the Centra l Motor Vehicles Rules 1989 or permits under
sub-section (14) read with sub -section (9) of section 88 of
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, plying for hire or reward
permitted to carry more than twelve passengers (excluding
driver and conductor or attendant) fo r every passenger.
2500.00

(b) Motor Vehicles (Sleeper Coaches) plying for hire or reward,
constructed or adapted to carry passengers (excluding
driver and conductor or attendant) and comply with rule
125(c) with AIS 119 standards of the Central Mot or
Vehicles Rules, 1989, or Motor Vehicles with permits
granted under rule 82 to 85 -A of the Central Motor
Vehicles Rules, 1989 or permits under sub -section (14)
read with sub -section (9) of section 88 of the Motor
Vehicles Act 1988, plying for hire or rew ard permitted to
carry more than twelve passengers (excluding driver and
conductor or attendant) for every sleeper.
3000.00

”

(d) in item no 13, after the words "Motor Vehicles", the words
"already registered in the State" shall be inserted;

(ii) afte r Part -A2 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
inserted, namely: -
“PART –A2(a)
[see section 3(1)]
Commercial Tractors Trailers
Sl.
No. Classes of vehicles Commercial
Tractors Trailers
2 3
A At the time of Registration of New Vehicle 10 % of cost of the
Vehicle
B If the vehicle is already registered and its age from the
month of Registration is: Percentage of the Life
Time Tax levied
under Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93%
More than 2 Years but not more than 3 Years 87%
More than 3 Years but not more than 4 Years 81%
More than 4Years but not more than 5 Years 75%
More than5Years but not more than 6 Years 69%
More than6Years but not more than 7 Years 64%
More than7Years but not more than 8 Years 59%
More than 8Years but not more than 9 Years 54%
More than9Years but not more than10 Years 49%
More than10Years but not more than11 Years 45%
More than11Years but not more than12 Years 41%
More than12Years but not more than13 Years 37%
More tha n13Years but not more than 14 Years 33%
More than14Years but not more than 15 Years 29%
More than15 years 25%
”
(iii) for Part -A5 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
substituted, namely: -

“PART A5
(see section 3(1))

Lifetim e Tax for Motor cars, Jeeps, Omni Buses and Private Service
Vehicles.

Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Service Motor car s,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private Motor cars,
Jeeps, Omni
Buses and
Private

Vehicles having
floor area up to 5
Sq. Mtrs, cost of
which does not
exceed
Rs. 5 Lakhs. Service
Vehicles
having floor
area up to 5
Sq. Mtrs,
cost of
which
exceedsRs 5
Lakhs but
does not
exceed
Rs.10Lakh Service
Vehicles
having floor
area up to 5
Sq. Mtrs,
cost of
which
exceeds
Rs10 Lakhs
but does not
exceed
Rs.20 Lakhs Service
Vehicles
having floor
area up to 5
Sq. Mtrs,
cost of
which
exceeds
Rs.20 Lakhs.
2 3 4 5 6
A At the time of
Registration of
New Vehicle 13 % of cost
of the Vehicle 14 % of the
cost of the
Vehicle 17% of the
cost of the
Vehicle 18% of the
cost of the
Vehicle
B If the vehicle is
already registered
and its age from
the month of
Registration is: Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A Percentage
of the Life
Time Tax
levied
under
Clause A
Not more than 2
years 93% 93% 93% 93%
More than 2
Years but not
more than 3
Years 87% 87% 87% 87%
More than 3
Years but not
more than 4
Years 81% 81% 81% 81%
More than 4
Years but not
more than 5
Years 75% 75% 75% 75%
More than 5
Years but not
more than 6
Years
69% 69% 69% 69%
More than 6
Years but not
more than7 Years
64% 64% 64% 64%
More than 7
Years but not
more than 8
Years 59% 59 59% 59%
More than 8 54% 54% 54% 54%

Years but not
more than 9
Years
More than 9
Years but not
more than 10
Years 49% 49% 49% 49%
More than 10
Years but not
more than11
Years 45% 45% 45% 45%
More than 11
Years but not
more than12
Years 41% 41% 41% 41%
More than 12
Years but not
more than13
Years 37% 37% 37% 37%
More than 13
Years but not
more than 14
Years 33% 33% 33% 33%
More than 14
Years but not
more than 15
Years 29% 29% 29% 29%
More than15
years 25% 25% 25% 25%
”

(iv) after Part -A5 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
inserted, namely: -

“PART A5(a)
(see section 3(1))
(Battery Operated Vehicle (BOV))
Lifetime Tax for Motor cars, Jeeps, Omni Buses and Private Service
Vehicles which run on Electricity
Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Motor cars, Jeeps,
Omni Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles run on
Electricity having
cost of the vehicle
which does not
exceed Rs. 10 Lakhs Motor cars, Jeeps,
Omni Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles run on
Electricity having
cost of the vehicle
which exceeds Rs.
Lakhs but does
not exceed Rs 25
Lakhs Motor cars, Jeeps,
Omni Buses and
Private Service
Vehicles run on
Electricity having
cost of the v ehicle
which exceeds Rs.
Lakhs

2 3 4 5
A At the time of
Registration of
New Vehicle 5 % of cost of
the Vehicle 8 % of the cost of
the Vehicle 10 % of the cost
of the Vehicle
B If the vehicle is
already
registered and
its age from the
month of
Registration is: Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A Percentage of the
Life Time Tax
levied under
Clause A
Not more than 2
years 93% 93% 93%
More than 2
Years but not
more th an 3
Years 87% 87% 87%
More than 3
Years but not
more than 4
Years 81% 81% 81%
More than
4Years but not
more than 5
Years
75% 75% 75%
More
than5Years but
not more than6
Years
69% 69% 69%
More
than6Years but
not more than7
Years 64% 64% 64%
More
than7Years but
not more than 8
Years 59% 59% 59%
More than
8Years but not
more than 9
Years 54% 54% 54%
More
than9Years but
not more
than10 Years 49% 49% 49%

More
than10Years
but not more
than11 Years 45% 45% 45%
More
than11Years
but no t more
than12 Years
41% 41% 41%
More
than12Years
but not more
than13 Years 37% 37% 37%
More
than13Years
but not more
than 14 Years 33% 33% 33%
More
than14Years
but not more
than 15 Years 29% 29% 29%
More than15
years 25% 25% 25%
”

(v) fo r Part -A7 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
substituted, namely: -
“PART A7
(see section 3(1))

Lifetime Tax for Construction Equipment Vehicles (As renumbered and
defined under Rule 2(cab) of C M V Rules,1989) And vehicles fitted wit h
Air Compressor and Generators.

Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Construction
equipment
vehicles
2 3
A At the time of Registration of New Vehicles 10 percent of cost of
the Vehicle
B If the vehicle is already registered and its age
from the month of Reg istration is: Percentage of the
Life Time Tax levied
under Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93%
More than 2 Years but not more than 3 Years 87%
More than 3 Years but not more than 4 Years 81%
More than 4 Years but not more than 5 Years 75%
More than 5 Years but not more than 6 Years 69%

More than 6 Years but not more than 7 Years 64%
More than 7 Years but not more than 8 Years 59%
More than 8 Years but not more than 9 Years 54%
More than 9 Years but not more than 10 Years 49%
More than 10 Years but not more than 11
Years 45%
More than 11 Years but not more than 12
Years 41%
More than 12 Years but not more than 13
Years 37%
More than 13 Years but not more than 14
Years 33%
More than 14 Years but not more than 15
Years 29%
More than 15 years 25%
”
(vi) for Part -A8 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
substituted, namely: -
“PART A8
{see section 3(1)}
Lifetime Tax for Motor Cabs other than those registered out - side the
State and covered with the permit issued under sub -section (9) of

Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Cost of the
vehicle which
does not
exceed
Rs. 10 Lakhs Cost of the
vehicle
which
exceeds
Rs. 10 Lakhs
but does not
exceed Rs. 15
Lakhs Cost of the
vehicle which
exceeds
Rs. 15 Lakhs

2 3 4 5
A At the time of
Registration of New
Vehicles 5% of the cost
of the vehicle 9% of the cost
of the vehicle 15% of the cost
of the vehicle
B If the vehicle is already
registered and its age
from the month of
Registration is: Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause A Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause
A Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years but
not more than 3 Years 87% 87% 87%
More than 3 Years but
not more than 4 Years 81% 81% 81%
More than 4 Years but
not more than 5 Years 75% 75% 75%

More than 5 Years but
not more than 6 Years 69% 69% 69%
More than 6 Years but
not more than 7 Years 64% 64% 64%
More than 7 Years but
not more than 8 Years 59% 59% 59%
More than 8 Years but
not more than 9 Years 54% 54% 54%
More than 9 Years but
not more than 10
Years 49% 49% 49%
More than 10 Years
but not more than 11
Years 45% 45% 45%
More than 11 Years
but not more than 12
Years 41% 41% 41%
More than 12 Years
but not more than 13
Years 37% 37% 37%
More than 13 Years
but not more than 14
Years
33% 33% 33%
More than 14 Years
but not more than 15
Years 29% 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25% 25%
”

(vii) after Part -A8, and the entries relating thereto, the following shall
be inserted, namely: -
“PART A8(a)
(see section 3(1))
(Battery Operated Vehicles (BOV))
Lifetime Tax for Motor Cabs other than those registered out - side the
State and covered with the permit issued under sub -section (9) of
Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Motor Cabs
which run on
Electrici ty
having cost of
the vehicle
which does not
exceed Rs. 10
Lakhs Motor Cabs which
run on Electricity
having cost of the
vehicle which
exceeds Rs. 10
Lakhs but does
not exceed Rs. 25
Lakhs Motor Cabs
which run on
Electricity
having cost of
the vehicle
which exceeds
Rs. 25 Lakhs
2 3 4 5
A At the time of
Registration of New 5% of the cost
of the vehicle 8% of the cost
of the vehicle 10% of the
cost of the

Vehicles vehicle
B If the vehicle is
already registered and
its age from the
month of Registration
is: Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause
A Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause A Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax levied
under Clause
A
Not more than 2 years 93% 93% 93%
More than 2 Years
but not more than 3
Years 87% 87% 87%
More than 3 Years
but not more than 4
Years 81% 81% 81%
More than 4 Years
but not more than 5
Years 75% 75% 75%
More than 5 Years
but not more than 6
Years 69% 69% 69%
More than 6 Years
but not more than 7
Years 64% 64% 64%
More than 7 Years
but not more than 8
Years 59% 59% 59%
More than 8 Years
but not more than 9
Years 54% 54% 54%
More than 9 Years
but not more than 10
Years 49% 49% 49%
More than 10 Years
but not more than 11
Years
45% 45% 45%
More than 11 Years
but not more than 12
Years 41% 41% 41%
More than 12 Years
but not more than 13
Years 37% 37% 37%
More than 13 Years
but not more than 14
Years 33% 33% 33%
More than 14 Years
but not more than 15
Years 29% 29% 29%
More than 15 years 25% 25% 25%

”

(viii) after Part -A9,and the entries relating thereto, the following shall
be inserted, namely: -
“PART A -10
(see section 3(1))
Lifetime Tax for Motor Vehicles Mounted with Drilling Rigs or Mounted
with Air Compressor with drilling rig unit vehicles

Sl.
No. Class of vehicles Cost of the
vehicle
2 3
A At the time of Registration of New Vehicles 10% of the cost
of the vehicle
B If the vehicle is already registered and its age from the
month of Registration is: Percentage of
the Life Time
Tax lev ied
under Clause A
Not more than 2 years 93%
More than 2 Years but not more than 3 Years 87%
More than 3 Years but not more than 4 Years 81%
More than 4 Years but not more than 5 Years 75%
More than 5 Years but not more than 6 Years 69%
More than 6 Years but not more than 7 Years 64%
More than 7 Years but not more than 8 Years 59%
More than 8 Years but not more than 9 Years 54%
More than 9 Years but not more than 10 Years 49%
More than 10 Years but not more than 11 Years 45%
More than 11 Years but not more than 12 Years 41%
More than 12 Years but not more than 13 Years 37%
More than 13 Years but not more than 14 Years 33%
More than 14 Years but not more than 15 Years 29%
More than 15 years 25%
”
(2) In Part C,-

(i) after Part C1,and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
inserted, namely: -
“PART C1(a)
(see section 7(3))
Refund Table for Commercial Tractors Trailers
Sl.No. If after the registration removal of vehicles or
cancellation of Registr ation of vehicle taken
place. Percentage of Life Time
Tax paid to be refunded

Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil
”
(ii) after Part C4, and the entries relating thereto , the following shall
be inserted, namely: -
“PART C4(a)
(see section 7(3))
Refund Table for Motor cars, Jeeps, Omni Buses and Private Service
Vehicles which run on Electricity.
Sl.No. If after the registration removal of vehicles or
cancellation of Registr ation of vehicle taken
place. Percentage of Life Time
Tax paid to be refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but within 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%

After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil
”

(iii) after Part C7, and the entries relating there to, the following shall
be inserted, namely: -
“PART C7(a)
(see section 7(3))
Refund Table for Motor cab which run on Electricity.
Sl.No. If after the registration removal of vehicles or
cancellation of Registration of vehicle taken
place. Percentage of Life Time
Tax paid to be refunded
Within a year 93%
After 1 year but within 2 years 87%
After 2 year but within 3 years 81%
After 3 year but within 4 years 75%
After 4 year but within 5 years 69%
After 5 year but wit hin 6 years 64%
After 6 year but within 7 years 59%
After 7 year but within 8 years 54%
After 8 year but within 9 years 49%
After 9 year but within 10 years 45%
After 10 year but within 11 years 41%
After 11 year but within 12 years 37%
After 12 year but within 13 years 33%
After 13 year but within 14 years 29%
After 14 year but within 15 years 25%
After 15 years Nil
”

6. Power to remove difficulty. - (1) If any difficulty arises in givi ng
effect to the provisions of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation
(Amendment) Act, 2026 the State Government may, by order published in
the Official Gazette, make such provisions as may appear to it be necessary
or expedient for the purposes removing di fficulty:

Provided that, no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period
of two years from the date of commencement of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2026.

(2) Every order made under sub -section (1) shall, as soon as afte r it is
made, be laid before the State Legislature.

By Order and in the name of
the Governor of Karnataka,

G. SRIDHAR
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary
Affairs and Legisl ation