An Act to provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Bihar and f or matters connected
therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000.
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, —
(a) ―appointed day1‖ means the day which the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint;
(b) ―article ‖ means an article of the Constitution;
(c) ―assembly constituency ‖, ―council constituency ‖ and ―parliamentary constituency ‖ have the
same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);
(d) ―Election Commission ‖ means the Election Commission appointed by t he President under
article 324;
(e) ―existing State of Bihar ‖ means the State of Bihar as existing immedi ately before the
appointed day;
(f) ―law‖ includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, notification
or other instrument having, immediately before the appointed day, the force of law in the whole or in
any part of the existing State of Bihar;
(g) ―notified order ‖ means an order pub lished in the Official Gazette;
(h) ―population ratio ‖, in relation to the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, means the ratio of
645.30:218.44;
(i) ―sitting member ‖, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of the existing
State of Bihar, means a person who immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that
House;
(j) ―successor State ‖, in relation to the existing State of Bihar, means the State of Bihar or
Jharkhand;
(k) ―transferred territory ‖ means the territory which on the appointed day is transferred from the
existing State of B ihar to the State of Jharkhand;
(l) ―treasur y‖ includes a sub -treasury; and
(m) any reference to a distri ct, tahsil or other territorial division of the existing State of Bihar
shall be construed as a reference to the area comprised within that territorial division on the appointed
day.
PART II
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF BIHAR
3. Formation of Jharkhand St ate.—On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new
State to be known as the State of Jharkhand comprising the following territories of the existing State of
Bihar, n amely: —
Bokaro, Chatra, Deog arh, Dhanbad, Dumka, Garhwa, Giridih, Godda, Gumla, Hazaribagh,
Kodarma, Lohardaga, Pakur, Palamau, Ranchi, Sahebganj, Singhbhum (East) and Singhbhum (West)
districts,
and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part of the existing State of Bihar.

1. 15th November, 2000, vide notification No. S.O. 829(E), dated 14th September, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part
II, sec. 3( ii).

4. State of Bihar and territorial divisions thereof .—On and from the appointed day, the State of
Bihar shall comprise the territories of the existing State of Bihar other than those specified in sec tion 3.
5. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constit ution. —On and from the appointed day, in the
First Schedule to the Constitution, und er the heading ―I. THE STATES ‖,—
(a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Bihar, the foll owing shal l be added at
the end, namely: —
―and the territor ies specified in section 3 of the B ihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 ‖;
(b) after entry 27, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: —
―28. Jharkhand: The territories specified in section 3 of the B ihar Reorganisation Act, 2000. ‖.
6. Saving powers of State Governments .—Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be
deemed to affect the power of the Government of Bihar or Jharkhand to alter, after the appointed day, the
name, area or bounda ries of any district or other territorial division in the State.
PART III
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
The Council of States
7. Amendment of the Fourt h Schedule to the Constitution. —On and from the appointed day, in
the Fourth Schedule to t he Constitution, in the Table, —
(a) entries 4 to 29 shall be renumbered a s entries 5 to 30 respectively;
(b) in entry 3, for the figures ―22‖ the figur es ―16‖ shall be substituted;
(c) after entry 3, the following e ntry shall be inserted, namely: —
―4. Jharkhand..................................... . 6‖.
8. Allocation of sitting member s.—(1) On and from the appointed day, the twenty -two sitting
members of the Council of States representing the existing State of Bihar shall be deemed to have been
elected to fill the seats allotted to the States of Bihar and Jh arkhand, as specified in the First Schedule to
this Act.
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.
The House of the People
9. Representation in the House of the People .—On and from the appointed day, there shall be
allocated 40 seats to the successor State of Bihar, and 14 to the successor State of Jharkhand, in the House
of the People and in t he First Schedule to the Represe ntation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950 ), under
heading ―I. STATES: ‖,—
(a) for entry 4, the following entry shall be substituted, namely: —
―4. Bihar 53 7 5 40 7 ..‖;
(b) entries 10 to 25 shall be renumbered as entries 11 to 26 respectively;
(c) after entry 9, the following e ntry shall be inserted, namely: —
―10. Jharkhand .. .. .. 14 1 5‖.
10. Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies .—On and from the appointed
day, the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, shall stand amended as
directed in the Second Schedule to this Act.
11. P rovision as to sitting members. —(1) Every sitting member of the House of the People
representing a constituency which, on the appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 10, stands
allotted, with or without alteration of boundaries, to the successor State of Bihar or Jharkhand, shall be
deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by th at constituency as so allotted.

(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.
The Legislative Assembly
12. Provisions as t o Legislative Assemblies. —(1) The number of seats as on the appointed day in
the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand shall be two hundred and forty -three and
eighty -one respectively.
(2) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), under heading
―I. Sta tes‖,—
(a) for entry 4, the following entry shall be substituted, namely: —
―4. Bihar 318 45 29 243 39 .. ―;
(b) entries 11 to 27 shall be renumbered as entries 12 to 28 respectively;
(c) after entry 10, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: —
―11. Jharkhand .. .. .. 81 9 28‖.
13. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the
existing State of Bihar elected to fill a seat in that Assembly from a constituency which on the appointed
day by virtue of the provisions of section 10 stands allotted, with or without alteration of boundaries, to
the State of Jharkhand shall, on and from that day, cease to be a member of the Legislative Assembly of
Bihar and shall be deemed to have been elected to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly of Jha rkhand
from th at constituency as so allotted.
(2) All other sitting members of the Legislative As sembly of the existing State of Bihar shall continue
to be members of the Legislative Assembly of that State and any such sitting member representing a
constituency the extent, or the name and extent of which are altered by virtue of the provisions of section
shall be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Bihar by t hat constituency as so
altered .
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Le gislative
Assemblies of Bihar and Jharkhand shall be deemed to be duly co nstituted on the appointed day.
(4) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Bihar nominated to that
Assembly under article 333 to represent the Anglo -Indian community shall be deemed to have been
nominated to represent the said community in the Legislati ve Assembly of Jharkhand under that article .
14. Duration of Legislative Assemblies .—The period of five years referred to in clause ( 1) of
article 172 shall, in the case of Legislative Assembly of the State of Bihar or Jharkhand be deemed to
have commenced on the date on which it actually commenced in the case of Legislative Assembly of the
existing State of Bihar.
15. Speaker and Deputy Speak er.—(1) The persons who immediately before the appointed day are
the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Bihar shall continue
to be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively of th at Assembly on and from that day.
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative Assembly of Jharkhand shall choose
two members of that Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and until they are
so chosen, the duties of the office of Speaker shall be performed by such member of the Assembly as the
Governor may appoint for the purpo se.
16. Rules of p rocedure .—The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative
Assembly of Bihar as in force immediately before the appointed day shall, until ru les are made under
clause ( 1) of article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduc t of business of the Legislative Assembly of
Jharkhand, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker thereof.
The Legislative Council of Bihar
17. Legislative Council of Bihar .—On and from the day on which all the members specified in the
Third Schedule retire, there shall be seventy -five seats in the Legislative Council of Bihar, and in the
Third Schedule to the Representa tion of the Pe ople Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), for the existing entry 2, the
following entr y shall be substituted, namely: —
―2. Bihar 75 24 6 6 27 12‖.

18. Council constituencies .—On and from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Council
Constituencies (Bihar) Order, 1951 shall stand amended as directed in the Fourth Schedule.
19. P rovision as to sitting members .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17, all sitting
member s of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Bihar, shall continue to be members of that
Council till they retire on the expiration of thei r present term of office.
20. Chairman and Deputy Chairman .—The person who immediately before the appointed day is
the Chairman or Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Bihar shall continue
to be the Chairman or Deputy Chairman, as the case may be, on and from that day of that Council.
Delimitation of constituencies.
21. Delimitation of constituencies .—(1) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the
Legislative Assemblies of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand respectively, having regard to the
relevant provisions of the Constitution;
(b) the assembly constitue ncies into which each State referred to in clause ( a) shall be divided,
the extent of each of such constituencies and in which of them seats shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes o r for the Scheduled Tribes; and
(c) the adjustments in the boundaries a nd description of the extent of the parliamentary
constituencies in each successor States that may be necessary or expedient.
(2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1), the Election
Commission shall have regard to the following provisions, namely: —
(a) all the constituencies shall be si ngle-member constituencies;
(b) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas, and in
delimiting them, regard shall be had to physical features, ex isting boundaries of administrative units,
facilities of communication and conveniences to the public ; and
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion of their population to the total
population is the larg est.
(3) The Election Commission shall, for the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its functions
under sub -section ( 1), associate with itself as associate members, five persons as the Central Government
may by order specify, being persons who are members of the Legislative Assembly of the State or of the
House of the People representing the State:
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any decis ion of the
Election Commission.
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled
as far as practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3).
(5) The Election Commiss ion shall —
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together with the dissenting
proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof in the Official Gazette and
in such other manner as the Commission may consi der fit, together with a notice inviting objections
and suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals wi ll
be further considered by it;
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been receive d by i t before the date so
specified;
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the
date so specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such
order or orders to be published in the Official Gazett e,
and upon such publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be c alled in
question in any court.

(6) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating to assembly constituencies
shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the concerned State.
(7) The delimitation of constituencies in the States of Bihar and Jharkhand shall be determined on
the basis of the published figures of the census taken in the year 1971.
22. Power of the Election Commission to maintain Delimitation Orders up -to-date. —(1) The
Election Commission may, from time to time, by notific ation in the Official Gazette, —
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 21 or any err or arising therein
from inadvertent slip or omission;
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any such order or orders
is or are altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such
order up -to-date.
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is issued, before the concerned Legislative Assembly.
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
23. Amendment of the Sch eduled Castes Order .—On and from the appointed day, the Constitution
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Fifth Schedule.
24. Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order .—On and from the appointed day, the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Sixth Schedule.
PART IV
HIGH COURT
25. High Court of Jharkhand .—(1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be a separate High
Court for the State of Jharkhand (hereinafter referred to as the High Court of Jharkhand) and the High
Court at Patna shall become the High Court for the State of Bihar (hereinafter referred to as the High
Court at Patna).
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Jharkhand shall be at such place as the Pres ident m ay, by
notified order, appoint.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Judges and division courts of the High
Court of Jharkhand may sit at such other place or places in the State of Jharkhand other than its principal
seat as the Chief Justice may, with the appr oval of the Governor of Jharkhand, appoint.
26. Judges of High Court .—(1) Such of the Judges of the High Court at Patna holding office
immediately before the appointed day as may be determined by the President shall on that day cease to be
Judges of the High Court at Patna and become Judges of the High Court of Jharkhand.
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub -section ( 1) become Judges of the High Court of Jharkhand shall,
except in the case where any such person is appointed to be the Chief Justice of that High Court, rank in
that Court accor ding to the priority of their re spective appointment as Judges of the High Court of Patna.
27. Jurisdiction of High Court. —The High Court of Jharkhand shall have, in respect of a ny part of
the territories included in the State of Jharkhand, all such jurisdiction, powers and authorities as, under the
law in force immediately before the appointe d day, are exercisable in respect of that part of the said
territor ies by the High Court at Patna.
28. Special provision relating to Bar Council and Advocates. —(1) On and from the appointed day,
in the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), in section 3, in sub -section ( 1), in clause ( a), after the words
―Jammu and Kashmir ‖, the word ―Jharkhand ‖ shall be inserted.
(2) Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate on the roll of the Bar
Council of the existing State of Bihar may give his option in writing, within one year from the appointed
day to the Bar Counci l of such existin g State, to tra nsfer his name on the roll of the Bar Council of
Jharkhand and notwithstanding anything contained in the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961) and the rules
made thereunder, on such option so given his name shall be deemed to have been transferre d on the rol l
of the Bar Council of Jharkhand with effect from the date of the option so given for the purposes of the
said Act and the rules made thereunder.

(3) The person other than the advocates who are entitled immediately befor e the appoi nted day, to
practis e in the High Court at Patna or any subordinate court thereof shall, on and after the appointed day,
be recognised as such persons entitled also t o practise in the High Court of Jharkhand or any subordinate
court thereof, as the case may be.
(4) The right of audience in the High Court of Jharkhand shall be regulated in accordance with the
like principles as, immediately before the appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of audie nce
in the High Court at Patna.
29. Practice and procedu re in common High Court. —Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law
in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Court at
Patna shall, with the necessary modifications, appl y in relation to the High Court of Jharkhand, and
accordingly, the High Court of Jharkhand shall have all such powers to make rules and orders with
respect to practice and procedure as immediately before the appointed day exercisable by the High Court
at Patna:
Provided that any ru les or orders which are in force immediately before the appointed day with
respect to practice and procedure in the High Court at Patna shall, until varied or revoked by rules or
orders made by the High Court of Jharkhand, apply with the necessary modifica tions in relation to
practice and procedure in the High Court of Jharkhand as if made by that court.
30. Custody of seal of High Court. —The law in force immediately before the appointed day with
respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court at Patn a shall with the necessary modifications, apply
with respect to the custody of the seal of the High court of Jharkhand.
31. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day
with respect to the form of writs and speci al processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court at Patna
shall, with the necessary modifi caitons, apply with re spect to the form of writs and other processes used,
issued or awarded by the High Court of Jharkhand.
32. Powers of Judges. —The law in fo rce immediately before the appointed day relating to the
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court at Patna with respect to
all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers sh all, with the necessary modification, apply in
relation to the High Court of Jharkhand.
33. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court. —The law in force immediately before the
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court at Patna and the Judges and
division courts thereof shall, wit h the necessary modification, ap ply in relation to the High Court of
Jharkhand.
34. Transfer of proceedings from High Court at Pa tna to High Court of Jharkhand. —(1) Except
as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Patna shall, as from t he appointed day, have no jurisdiction in
respec t of the transferred territory.
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Patna immediately before the appointed day as are
certified, whether before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of the Hig h Court, having regard to the
places of accrual of the cause of action and both other circumstances, to be proceedings which are ought
to be heard and decided by the High Court of Jharkhand shall as soon as may be after such certification,
be transferred t o the High Court of Jharkhand.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this section or in section 27, but
save as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Patna shall have, and the High Court of Jharkhand shall
not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any relief
in respect of any order passed by the High Court at Patna before the appointed day:
Provided that if after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Patna, it appears to
the Chief Justice of the High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of Jharkhand, he
shall order that the y shall be so transferred , and such proceedings shall thereu pon be transferred
accordingly.
(4) Any order m ade by the High Court at Patna —
(a) before the appointed day, in any proceeding to the High Court of Jharkhand by virtue of
sub-section ( 2), or

(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Patna retains jurisdiction by virtue
of sub -section ( 3) shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order or the High Court at Patna,
but also as an orde r made by the High Court of Jharkhand.
35. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to High Court of Jharkhand .—Any
person, who immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practice or an attorney
entitled to act, in the High Court at Patna and so aut horised to appear or to act in any proceedings
transferred from that High Court to the High Court of Jharkhand under section 34 shall have the right to
appear or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Jharkhand in relation to those proceedings.
36. Interpretation. —For the purposes of section 34 —
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has disposed of all issues
between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, application for
review, petitions for revision a nd petition for writs;
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division
court thereof, and reference to order made by a court or the Judge shall be construed as including
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or mad e by that court of Judge.
37. Saving .—Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of Jharkhand of any
provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made
on or after the appointed day with respect to th at High Court by any Legislature or other authority having
power to make such pro vision.
PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES
38. Authorisation of expenditure of Jharkhand State .—The Governor of Bihar may, at any time
before the appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Sta te of
Jharkhand as he deems necessary for any period not more than six m onths beginning with the appointed
day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Jharkhand:
Provided that the Governor of Jharkhand may, af ter the appointed day, authorise such further
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Jharkhand for any period
not extending beyond the said period of six months.
39. Reports relat ing to accounts of Bihar State. —(1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India referred to in clause ( 2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the existing State of
Bihar in respect of any period prior to the appoint ed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each of the
successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of that
State.
(2) The President, after considering the views of the State Legislatures of the successor States, may
by order —
(a) declare any expenditure incurr ed out of the Consolidated Fund of Bihar on any service in
respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the financial year or in respect of any earlier
financial year in excess o f the amount granted for that se rvice and for that year as disclose d in the
reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) to have been duly authorised; and
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said report s.
40. Distribution of revenue. —The President shall, by order, determine the share of States of Bihar
and Jharkhand in the total amount payable to the existing State of Bihar on the recommendation of the
Finance Commission constituted under article 280 of t he Constitution, in such manner as he thinks fit.
PART VI
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
41. Application of Part. —(1) The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the apportionment
of the assets and liabilities of the existing State of Bihar immedi ately before the appointed day.

(2) The successor States shall be entit led to receive benefits arising out of the decisions taken by the
predecessor State and the successor States shall be liable to bear the financial liabilities arising out of the
decisions taken by the existing State of Bihar.
(3) The apportionment of asset s and liabilities would be subject to such financial adjustment as may
be necessary to secure just, reasonable and equitable apportionment of the assets and liabilities amongst
the su ccessor States.
(4) Any dispute regarding the amount of financial assets and liabilities shall be settled through mutual
agreement, failing which by order, by the Central Government on the advice of the Comptroll er and
Auditor -General of India
42. Land and goods. —(1) Subject to other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles and
other goods belonging to the existing State of Bihar shall, —
(a) if within the transferred territory, pas s to the State of Jharkhand; or
(b) in any other case, remain the property of the State of Bihar:
Provided that where the Central Government is of opinion that any goods or class of goods should be
distributed between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, otherwise that according to the situation of the
goods, the Central Government may issue such direct ions as it thinks fit for a just and equitable
distribution of the goods and the goods shall pass to th e successor States accordingly.
(2) Stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in particular institutions, workshops or
undertakings or on particular works under const ruction, shall pass to the successor States in whose
territories such institutions, workshops, und ertakings or works are located.
(3) Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heads of Departments having jurisdiction over the
whole of the existing State of Bihar shall be divided as may be agreed upon between the successor States,
or in default of such agreement, as the Cent ral Government may by order direct for a just and equitab le
distribution of such stores.
(4) Any other unissued stores of any cl ass in the existing State of Bihar shall be divided between the
successor States in proportion to the total stores of that class purchased in the period of three years prior
to the appointed day, for the territories of the existing State of Bihar included respectively i n each of the
successor States:
Provided that where such proportion cannot be ascertained in respect of any class of stores or where
the value of any class of such stores does not exceed rupees ten thousand, that class of stores shall be
divided between the successor States ac cording t o the population ratio.
(5) In this section, the expression ―land‖ includes immovable property of every kind and any rights in
or over such property, and the expression ―goods ‖ does not include coins, bank notes and currency notes.
43. Treasury and bank balances .—The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the State of
Bihar and the credit balances of the State with Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India or any other
bank immediately before the appointed day shall b e divided between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand
according to the population ratio:
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash balances from any
treasury to any other treasury and the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the credit balance of
the two States in the books of the Reserve Ban k of India on the appointed day:
Provided further that if the State of Jharkhand has no account on the appointed day with the Reserve
Bank of India, the adjustment shall be made in such manner as the Central Go vernment may, by order,
direct.
44. Arrears of taxes. —The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty on property, including arrears
of land revenue, shall belong to the successor State in which the property is situated, and the right to
recover arrears of any other tax or duty shall b e long to the successor State in whose territories the place
of assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed day.

45. Right to recover loans and advances. —(1) The right of the existing State of Bihar to recover
any loans or advances made before the appointed day to any local body, society, agriculturist or other
person in an area within that State shall belong to th e successor State in which th at area is included on
that day.
(2) The right of the existing State of Bihar to recover any loans or advances made before the
appointed day to any person or institution outside that State shal l belong to the State of Bihar:
Provided that any sum recovered in respect of any such loan or advance shall be divided between the
States of Bihar and Jharkhand acc ording to the population ratio.
46. Investments and credits in certain funds .—(1) The securities held in respect of the investments
made from Cash Balance s Investment Account or from any Fund in the Public Account of the existing
State of Bihar as specif ied in the Seventh Schedule shal l be apportioned in the ratio of popu lation of the
successor States:
Provided that the securities held in investments made f rom the Calamity Relief Fund of the existing
State of Bihar shall be divided in the ratio of the area of the territories occupied by the successor States:
Provided further that the balance in the Reserve Funds in the Public Account of Bihar created wholly
out of appropriations from the Consolidated Fund of the existing State of Bihar, to the extent the balances
have not been invested outside Government acc ount, shall not be carried forward to similar Reserve
Funds in the Public Account of, successor States.
(2) The investments of the existing State of Bihar immediately before the appointed day, in any
special fund, the objects of which are confined to a local area, shall belong to the State in which that area
is included on the appointed day.
(3) The investm ents of the existing State of Bihar immediately before the appointed day in any
private, commercial or industrial undertaking, in so far as such investments have not been made or are
deemed not to have been m ade from the cash balance invest ment account, sh all pass to the State in which
the principal seat of business of the undertaking is located.
(4) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the
existing State of Bihar or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, becomes an
inter-State body corporate, the investments in, or loans or advances to, any such body corporate by the
existing State of Bihar made before the appointed day shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by or
under this Act, be divid ed between th e States of Bihar and Jharkhand in the same proportion in which the
assets of the body corporate are divided under the provisions of this Part.
47. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings. —(1) The assets and liab ilities relating to any
commercial or industrial undertaking of the existing State of Bihar shall pass to the State in wh ich the
undertaking is located.
(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the existing State of Bihar for any such
commerc ial or industrial undertaking, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund
shall pass to the State in which the undertaking is loc ated.
48. Public Debt. —(1) All liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account of the existing
State of Bihar outstanding immediately before the appointed day shall be apportioned in the ratio of
population of the succes sor States unless a different mo de of apportionment is provided under the
provisions of this Act.
(2) The individual items of lia bilities to be allocated to the successor States and the amount of
contribution required to be made by one successor State to another shall be such as may be ordered by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptro ller and Auditor -General of Indi a:
Provided that till such orders are issued, the liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account
of the existing State of Bihar shall continue to be the liabilities o f the successor State of Bihar.
(3) The liability on account of loans raised fro m any source and re -lent by the existing State of Bihar
to such entities as may be specified by the Central Government and whose area of operation is confined to
either of the successor States shall devolve on the respective States as specified in sub -section (4).

(4) The public debt of the existing State of Bihar attributable to loan taken from any source for the
express purpose of re -lending the same to a specific institution and outstanding immediately before the
appointed day shall —
(a) if re -lent to any local body, body corporate or other institution in any local area, be the debt of
the State in which the local area is in cluded on the appointed day; or
(b) if re -lent to the Bihar State Electricity Board, the Bihar State Road Transport Corporation, or
the Bihar Housing Board or any other institution which becomes an inter -State institution on the
appointed day, be divided between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand in the same proportion in which
the assets of such body corporate or institution are divid ed under the prov isions of Part VII of this
Act.
(5) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund is maintained by the existing State of Bihar for
repayment of any loan raised by it, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund shall
be divided between the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand in the same proportion in which the total
public debt is divided between the two States under this section.
(6) In this section, the expression ―Government security ‖ means a security created and issued by a
State Government for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified in, or
prescribed under clause ( 2) of section 2 of the Publ ic Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944).
49. Floating Debt .—The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of any floating loan to
provide short -term finance to any commercial undertaking shall be the liability of the State in whose
territor ies the undertaking is located.
50. Refund of taxes collected in excess .—The liability of the existing S tate of Bihar to refund any
tax or duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor
State in whose territories the property is sit uated, and the liability of the existing State of Bihar to refund
any oth er tax or duty collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor State in whose territories
the place of assessment o f that tax or duty is included.
51. Deposits, etc .—(1) The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of any civil depos it or
loan fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose area the deposit
has been made.
(2) The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of any charitable or other endowment shall,
as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose area the institution entitled to the benefit
of the e ndowment is located or of the St ate to which the objects of the endowment under the terms
thereof, are confined.
52. Provident fund. —The liability of the exis ting State of Bihar in respect of the provident fund
account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that day, be the liability of
the State to whi ch that Government servant is per manently allotted.
53. Pensions. —The liabilit y of the existing State of Bihar in respect of pensions and other retirement
benefits shall pass to, or be apportioned between, the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand in
accordance with the provisions contained in the Eight h Schedule to this Act.
54. Contracts. —(1) Where, before the appointed day, the existing State of Bihar has made any
contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that contract shall be deemed
to have been made in the exercise of the executive po wer—
(a) if the purposes of the contract are, on and from the appointed day, exclusive purposes of either
of the successor States o f Bihar and Jharkhand; and
(b) any ot her case, of the State of Bihar,
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may a ccrue under any such contract shall, to the
extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of the existing State of Bihar, be rights or
liabilities of the State of Jharkhand or the St ate of Bihar, as the case may be:
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause ( b), the initial allocation of rights and
liabilities made by this sub -section shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon
between the successor States of Bihar and Jharkh and or in default of such ag reement, as the Central
Government may, by order, direct.

(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which have
accrued o r may accrue under any contract —
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal in proceedings
relating to the contract; and
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connec tion with any such proceedings.
(3) This section shall have effe ct subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations; and bank
balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that the partake of the nature of contract ual rights, be dealt
with under those provisions.
55. Liability in respect of actionable wrong. —Where, immediately before the appointed day, the
existing State of Bihar is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong other than breach of
contract, that liability shall, —
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories which, as from that day, are the
territories of either of the successor States of Bihar or Jharkhand, be a liabili ty of that successor State;
and
(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Bihar, but subject to such financial
adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand or, in default of such
agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, dir ect.
56. Liabilit y as guarantor .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of
Bihar is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co -operative society or other person,
that liability of the existing State of Bihar shall —
(a) if the area of operations of such society or persons is limited to the territories which, as from
that day, are the territories of either of the States of Bihar or Jharkhand, be a liabili ty of that successor
State; and
(b) in any other case, be initially a li ability of the State of Bihar, subject to such financial
adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand or, in default of such
agreements, as the Central Government may, by order, direct .
57. Items in suspense .—If any item in su spense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance
with that provision.
58. Residuary provision .—The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the existing State of
Bihar not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall pass to the State of Bihar in the first
instance, subject to such financial adjustment a may be agreed upon between the States of Bihar and
Jharkhand or, in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.
59. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement .—Where the successor States of Bihar and
Jharkhand agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liabilit y should be apportioned
between them in a manner other than that provided for i n the foregoing provisions of this Part,
notwithstanding anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be
apportioned in the manner agreed u pon.
60. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases .—Where,
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand
becomes entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or beco mes subject to any liability, and the
Central Government is of opinion, on a reference made within a period of three years from the appointed
day by either of the States, that it is just and equitable that property or those benefits should be transfer red
to, or shared with, the other successor State, or that a contribution towards that liability should be made
by the other successor State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner between the
two States, or the other State shall m ake to the State subject to the liability such contribution in respect
thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with the two State Go vernments, by order,
determine.

61. Certain expenditure to be charged on Consolidated Fund. —All sums payable either by the
State of Bihar or by the State of Jharkhand to the other States or by the Central Government to either of
those States, by virtue of the provisions of this Act, sha ll be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the
State by which such sums are payable or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of India.
PART VII
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS
62. Provisions as to Bihar State Electricity Board, State Warehousing Corporation and State
Road Transport Corporation .—(1) The following bodies corporate constituted for the ex isting State of
Bihar, namely: —
(a) the State Electricity Board constituted under the Electricity Supply Act, 1948 (54 of 1948);
(b) the State Warehousing Corporation established under the Warehousing Corpo rations Act ,
(58 of 1962);
(c) the State Road Transport Corporation established under the Road Transport Act, 1950
(64 of 1950),
shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which they were
functioning immediately before that day, subject to the provisions of this section and to such directions as
may, from time to time, be issued by the Central Government.
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the Board or
the Corporation shall include a direction that the Act under which the Board or the Corporation was
constituted shall, in its application to that Board o r Corporation, have effect subject to such exceptions
and modifications as the Central Government t hinks fit.
(3) The Board or the Corporation referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall cease to function as from, and
shall be deemed to be dissolved on such date as the Central Government may, by order, appoint; and upon
such dissolution, its assets, rights and liabiliti es shall be apportioned between the successor States of
Bihar and Jharkhand in such manner as may be agreed upon between them within one year of the
dissolution of the Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, or if no agreement is reached, i n such
manner as the Central Gover nment may, by order, determine:
Provided that any liabilities of the said Board relating to the unpaid dues of the coal supplied to the
Board by any public sector coal company shall be provisionally apportioned between the State Electricity
Boards constituted respectively in the success or States of the existing State of Bihar or after the date
appointed for the dissolution of the Board under this sub -section in such manner as may be agreed upon
between the Governments of th e successor States within one month of such dissolution or if no agreement
is reached, in such manner as the Central Government may, by order, determine subject to reconciliation
and finalisation of the liabilities which shall be completed within three mon ths from the date of such
dissolution by the mutual agreement between the successor States or failing such agreement by the
direc tion of the Central Government:
Provided further that an interest at the rate of two per cent. higher than the Cash Credit inte rest shall
be paid on outstanding unpaid dues of the coal supplied to the Board by the public sector coal company
till the liqui dation of such dues by the conce rned State Electricity Board constituted in the successor
States on or after the date appointed for the dissolution of the Board under this sub -section.
(4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the
Government of the State of Bihar, or, as the case may be, the Government of the State of Jharkhand from
constituting, at any time on or after the appointed day, Stat e Electricity Board or a State Warehousing
Corporation or a Road Transport Corporation for the State under the provisions of the Act relating to such
Board or Corporation; and if such a Board or Corporation is so constituted in either of the States before
the dissolution of the Board or the Corporation r eferred to in sub -section ( 1),—
(a) provision may be made by order of the Central Government enabling the new Board or the
new Corporation to take over from the existing Board or Corporation all or any of it s undertakings,
assets, rights and liabilities in that State, and

(b) upon the dissolution of the existing Board or Corporation, —
(i) any assets, rights and liabilities which would otherwise have passed to that State by or
under the provisions of sub-section ( 3) shall pass to the new Board or the new Corporation
instead of to that State;
(ii) any employee who would otherwise have been transferred to or re -employed by that State
under sub -section ( 3), read with clause ( i) of sub -section ( 5), shall be transferred to or
re-employed by the new Board or the new Corporation instead of to or by th at State.
(5) An agreement entered into between the successor States under sub -section ( 3) and an order made
by the Central Government under that sub -section or under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) may provide for
the transfer or re -employment of any employee of th e Board or the Corporation referred to in
sub-section ( 1),—
(i) to or by the successor States, in the case of an agree ment under sub -section ( 4) or an ord er
made under that sub -section;
(ii) to or by the new Board or the new Corporation constituted under sub -section ( 4), in the
case of an order made under clause ( a) of that sub -section,
and, subject to the provisions of section 65, also for the terms and conditions of service applicable to such
employees after such transfer or re -employment.
63. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and
supply of water. —If it appears to the Centr al Government that the arrangement in regard to the
generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water for any ar ea or in regard to the execution of
any project for such generation or supply has been or is likely to be modified to the disadvanta ge of that
area by reason of the fact that it is, by virtue of the provisions of Part II of this Act, outside the State i n
which the power stations and other installations for the generation and supply of such power, or the
catchment area, reservoirs and o ther works for the supply of water, as the case may be, are located, the
Central Governme nt may give such directions as it deems proper to the State Government or other
authority concerned for the maintenance, so far as practicab le, of the previous arrange ment.
64. Provisions as to Bi har State Financial Corporation .—(1) The Bihar State Financial
Corporation established under the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951 (63 of 1951) shall, on and from
the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which it was functioning immediately
before that day, subject to the provisions of this section and to such directions as may, from time to time,
be issued by the Central Government.
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the
Corporation may include a direction that the said Act, in its application to the Corporation, shall have
effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as ma y be speci fied in the direction.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Board of Directors
of the Corporation may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and shall, if so required by
the Central Gove rnment, co nvene at any time afte r the appointed day a meeting for the consideration of a
scheme for the reconstitution or reorganisation or dissolution, as the case may be, of the Corporation,
including proposals regarding the formation of new Corporation , and the t ransfer thereto of th e assets,
rights and liabilities of the existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at the general meeting
by a resolution passed by a majority of the shareholders present and voting, the scheme shall be submitted
to the Cen tral Government for its sanct ion.
(4) If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either without modifications or with
modifications which are approved at a general meeting, the Central Government shall certify the scheme,
and upon such certifica tion, the scheme shall, notwi thstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
law for the time being in force, be binding on the corporations affected by the scheme as well as the
shareholders and creditors thereof.
(5) If the scheme is not so approved or sanctioned, the Central Government may refer the scheme to
such Judge of the High Court at Patna and Jharkhand as may be nominated in this behalf by the Chief
Justice thereof, and the decision of the Judge in regar d to the scheme shall be final and shall be binding on
the corporations affected by the scheme as well as the shar eholders and creditors thereof.

(6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the
Government of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand from constituting, at any time on or after the appointed
day, a State Financial Corporation for that State under the State Financial Corporations
Act, 1951 (63 of 1951).
65. Provisions as to certain companies. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing
provisions of this Part, each of the companies specified in the Ninth Schedule to this Act shall, on and
from the appointed day and until otherwise provided fo r in any law, or i n any agreement among the
successor States, or in any direction issued by the Central Government, continue to function in the areas
in which it was functioning immediately before that day; and the Central Government may, from time to
time, issue such direc tions in relation to such functioning as it may deem fit, notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or in any other law.
(2) Any directions issued under sub -section ( 1) in respect of a company referred to in that
sub-section, may include directions —
(a) regarding the division of the interests and shares of existing state of Bihar in the comp any
among the successor States;
(b) requiring the recons titution of the Board of Directors of the company so as to give adequate
representatio n to both the successor States.
66. General provision as to statutory corporations .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided by
the foregoing provisions of this Part, where anybody corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act
or Provincial Act f or the existing State of Bihar or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of
Part II of this Act, become an inter -State body corporate, then, the body corporate shall, on and from the
appointed day, continue to function and operate in those areas in respect of which it was func tioning and
operating immediately before that day, subject to such directions as may from time to time be issued by
the Central Government, until other provision is made by law in resp ect of the said body corporate.
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect o f any such
body corporate shall include a direction that any law by which the said body corporate is governed shall,
in its application t o that body corporate, have effe ct subject to such exceptions and modifications as may
be specified in the direction.
67. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits .—(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 88 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) a permit
granted by the State Transport Authority of the existing St ate of Bihar or any Regional Transport
Authority in that State shall, if such permit was, immediately before the appointed day, valid and effective
in any area in the transferred territory, be deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that area after
that day subject to the provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in that area; and it shall not be
necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by the State Transport Authority of Jharkhand or any
Regiona l Transport Authority therein fo r the purpose of vali dating it for use in such area:
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the successor State Government or
Governments concerned add to, amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the Authority b y
which the permit was granted.
(2) No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the appointed day in
respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in any of the successor States under any such permit, if
such vehicle was, immediately before tha t day, exempt from the payment of any such toll, entrance fees
or other charges for its operation s in the transferred territory:
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Government or
Governments con cerned, authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance fees or other charges, as the case
may be.
68. Special provisions relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases. —Where on
account of the reorganisation of the existing State of Bihar under thi s Act, any body corporate constituted
under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co -operative society registered under any law
relating to co -operative societies or any commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is reconstituted
or reorg anised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other body corporate, co -operative

society or undertaking, or is dissolved, and in consequence of such reconstitution, reorganisation,
amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such bo dy corporate or in any such co -operative
society or undertaking, is transferred to, or re -employe d by any other body corporate, or in any other
co-operative society or undertaking, then notwithstanding anything contained in section 25F, 25FF or
25FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) such transfer or re -employment shall not entitle
in to any compensation und er that section:
Provided that —
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer or
re-employment are not less favorable to the workman than those applicable to him immediately
before the transfer or re -employment;
(b) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the co -operative society or the undertaking
where the wor kman transferred or re -employed is, by agreement or otherwise, legally liable to pay to
the workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensatio n under section 25F, 25FF or 25FFF of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) on the basis that his ser vice has been continuous and
has not been interrupted by the transfer or re -employment.
69. Special provision as to income -tax.—Where the assets, rights and liabilities of any body
corporate carrying on business are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other bodies
corporate which after the transfer carry on the same busin ess, the losses or profits or gains sustained by
the body corporate first mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be carried
forward and se t off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the Income -tax Act,
(43 of 1961) shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate in accordance with the
rules to be made by the Central Government in this behal f and, upon such apportionment, the share of
loss allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter VI of the said Act, as if the transferee body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a busine ss
carried on by it in the years in whi ch these losses were sustained.
70. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions .—(1) The Government of State of Bihar
or Jharkhand, as the case may be, shall, in respect of the institutions specified in the Tenth Schedule to
this Act, located in that State, continue to prov ide facilities to the people of the other State which shall
not, in any respect, be less favourable to such people than what were being provided to them before the
appointed day, for su ch period and upon such terms and condi tions as may be agreed upon betw een the
two State Governments before the 1st day of December, 2001 or if no agreement is reached by the said
date as may be fixed by order of the Central G overnment.
(2) The Central Gov ernment may, at any time before the 1st day of December, 2001 by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify in the Tenth Schedule any other institution existing on the appointed day in
the States of Bihar and Jharkhand and on the issue of such notificat ion, the Schedule shall be deemed to
PART VIII
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES
71. Provisions relating to All -India Services .—(1) In this section , the expression ―State cadre ‖—
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian
Administrati ve Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Police
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; and
(c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Fore st
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966.
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service, Indian Police Service and Indian
Forest Service for the existing Stat e of Bihar, there shall, on and from the appointed day, be two separate
cadres , one for the State of Bihar and the other for the State of Jharkhand in respect of each of these
services.
(3) The initial strength and composition of the State cadres referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be such
as the Central Government may, by order, dete rmine before the appointed day.
(4) The members of each of the said service borne on the Bihar cadre thereof immediately before the
appointed day shall be allocated to the St ate cadres of the same service constituted under sub -section ( 2)
in such manner and with effect from such date o r dates as the Central Government may, by order, specify.

(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on or after the appointed day, of
the All -India Service Act, 1951 (61 of 1951) or the rules made thereunder.
72. Provisions relating to services in Bihar and Jharkhand —(1) Every person who immediately
before the appointed day is serving in connection with the affairs of t he existing State of Bihar shall, on
and from that day provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Bihar
unless he is required, by general or special order of the Central Government to serve provisionally in
connection wi th the aff airs of the State of Jharkhand:
Provided that no direction shall be issued under this section after the expiry of a period of o ne year
from the appointed day.
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by general or special
order, determine the successor State to which every person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be finally
allotted for serv ice and the date with effect fro m which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to
have taken effect.
(3) Every pe rson who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) to a successor State
shall, if he is not already serving therein be made available for serving in the successor State from such
date as may be agreed upon between the Governm ents concerne d or in default of such agreement, as may
be determ ined by the Central Government.
73. Other provisions relating to services .—(1) Nothing in section 72 shall be deemed to affect on or
after the appointed day the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in
relation to determ ination of the conditions of ser vice of persons serving in connection with the aff airs of
the Union or any State:
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day in t he case of
any person deemed to have been allocated to the State of Bihar or to the State of Jharkhand under
Government.
(2) All services prior to the appo inted day rendered by a person —
(a) if he is deemed to have been allocated to any State under section 72, shall be deemed to have
been rendered in connection with the affairs of that State;
(b) if he is deemed to have been allocated to the Union in connection with the administration of
the Jharkhand shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of the Union,
for the purposes of the rules regula ting his conditions of service.
(3) The provisions of section 72, shall not apply in relation to members of any All -India Service.
74. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post. —Every person who, immediately before
the appointed day is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affa irs
of the existing State of Bihar in any area which o n that day falls within any of the successor States shall
continue to hold the same post or office in that successor State, and shall be deemed, on and from that
day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or any other appr opriate
authority in, that successor State:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority, on and from
the appointed day, from passing in relation to such person any order affecting the continuance in such
post or office.
75. Advisory Committees. —The Central Government may by order establish one or more Advisory
Committees for the purpos e of assisting it in regard to —
(a) the discharge of any of its functions und er this Part; and
(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this
Part and the proper consideration of any repres entations made by such persons.
76. Power of Central Government to give directions. —The Central Government may give such
directions to the State Government of Bihar and the State Government of Jharkhand as may appear to it to
be necessary for the purpose of giving effect to the foregoin g provisions of this Part and the State
Government sh all comply with such directions.

77. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission. —(1) The Public Service Commission for
the existing State of Bihar shall, on and from the appointed day, be the Public Service Com mission for the
State of Bihar.
(2) The persons holding office immediately before the appointed day as Chairman or other member of
the Public Service Commission for the existing State of Bihar shall, as from the appointed day, be the
Chairman or, as the case may be, the other member of the Publi c Service Com mission for the State of
Bihar.
(3) Every person who becomes Chairman or other member of the Public Service Commission for the
State of Bihar on the appointed day under sub -section ( 2), shall —
(a) be entitled to receive from the Government of the State of Bihar conditions of service not less
favourable than those to which he was entitled under th e provisions applicable to him;
(b) subject to the proviso to clause ( 2) of article 316, hold office or continue to hold office until
the expiration of his term of office as determined under the provisions applicable to him immedi ately
before the appointed day.
(4) The report of the Bihar Public Service Commission as to the work done by the Commission in
respect of any period prior to the appointed day s hall be presented under clause ( 2) of article 323 to the
Governors of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, and the Governor of the State of Bihar shall, on receipt
of such report, cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining as far as possible, as
respects the cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such
non-acceptance to be laid before the Legislature of the State of Bihar and it shall not be necessary to
cause such report or any such m emorandum to be laid before the Legislative Asse mbly of the State of
Jharkhand.
PART IX
MANAGEMENT AND DEV ELOPMENT OF WATER RESOURCES
78. Water Resources Development and its Management. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in this Act but subject to the provisions of section 79, all rights and liabilities of the existing State of
Bihar in relation to water res ource projects in relation to, —
(i) Ganga and its tributaries; and
(ii) Sone and its tributaries,
shall, on the appointed day be the rights and liabilities of the successor States in such proportion as may
be fixed and subject to such adjustments as may be made, by agreement entered into by the said States
after consult ation with the Central Governmen t, or, if no such agreement is entered into wit hin two years
of the appointed day, then the Central Government may, by order, determine within one year having
regard to the purposes of the project:
Provided that the order so made by the Central Government may be varied by any subsequent
agreement enter ed into by the successor States after consultation with th e Central Government.
(2) An agreement or order referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, where an extension or further
development of any of the projects referred to in that sub -section after the appoi nted day is undertaken, be
the rights and liabilities of the successor States in relation to such ex tension or further development.
(3) The rights and liabilities referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall include, —
(a) the right to receive and utilise the water available for distribution as a result of the projects;
and
(b) the right to receive and utilise the power generated as a result of the projects,
but shall not include the rights and liabilities under any contract entered into before the appointe d day by
the Government of the existing State of Bihar with any person or a uthority other than Government.
79. Constitution and functions of Management Board. —(1) The Central Government shall
constitute a Board to be called the Ganga and Sone Management Bo ard (hereinafter referred to as the
Board) for administration, construction, maintenance and operation of projects referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 78 for any or for a combination of following purposes, namely: —
(i) Irrigation;

(ii) Rural and Urban Water Supply;
(iii) Hydro Power generation;
(iv) Navigation;
(v) Industries; and
(vi) for any other purpose which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify.
(2) The Board shall consist of —
(a) a whole -time Chairman and two whole -time members to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(b) a representative each of the Government of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand
and Madhya Pradesh to be nominated by the respective Governments;
(c) two representatives of the Central Government to b e nominated by that Government.
(3) The functi ons of the Board shall include —
(a) the regulation of supply of water from the projects referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 78
to States of Uttar Pradesh, Bi har, Jharkhand and Madhya Prade sh having regard to —
(i) any agreement entered into or arrangement made covering the Governments of existing
State of Bihar and the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jh arkhand and Madhya Pradesh, and
(ii) the agreement or the o rder referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 78;
(b) the regulation of supply of power generated at the projects referred to in sub -section ( 1) of
regard to—
(i) any agreement entered into or arrangement made covering the Governments of existing
State of Bihar and the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jh arkhand and Madhya Pradesh, and
(ii) the agreement or the order referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 78;
(c) the examination of the requirement of funds for various projects in terms of the programme
laid down for such projects and to advise the apportionment of the expenditure to the participating
States keeping in view the agr eement on the sharing of co st;
(d) to decide the withdrawal of water from the reservoirs during the construction period for
irrigation and power purposes with a view to securing better use of available water;
(e) the responsibility of devising programme of resettlement for persons displaced as a result of
Irriga tion Projects;
(f) construction of such of the remaining or new works connected with the development of the
water resource project relating to the rivers or their tributaries as the Central Government may specify
by notificat ion in the Official Gazette; an d
(g) such other functions as the Central Government may after consultation with the Governments
of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh entrust to it.
80. Staff of the Management Board .—(1) The B oard may employ such staff, as it may consider
necessary for the efficient discharge o f its functions under this Act:
Provided that every person who immediately before the constitution of the said Board was
engaged in the construction, maintenance or opera tion of the works relating to the projects referred to
in sub -section ( 1) of section 78 shall continue to be so empl oyed under the Board in connection with
the said works on the same terms and conditions of the service as were applicable to him before such
constitution until the Central Governme nt by order, directs otherwise:

Provided further that the said Board may at any time in consultation with the State Governments
or the Electricity Board concerned and with prior approval of the Central Government r etain any such
person for service under that State Government or Board.
(2) The Government of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh shall
at all times provide the necessary funds to the Board to meet all expenses (including the s alaries and
allowances of the staff) required for the discharge of its functions and such amounts shall be
apportioned among the States concerned in such proportion as the Central Government may having
regard to the benefits to each of the said States spe cify.
(3) The Board shall be under the control of the Central Government and shall comply with such
directions, as may from time to time, be given to it by that Government.
(4) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government delegate such of its powers,
functions and duties as it may deem fit to the Chairman of the said Board or to any of ficer
subordinate to the Board.
(5) The Central Government may, for the purpose of enabling the Board to function efficiently,
issue such directions to the State Governments concerned, or any other authority, and the State
Governments, or the other author ity shall comply with such direc tions.
81. Jurisdiction of the Board. —(1) The Board shall, ordinarily exercise jurisdiction in regard to
any of the projects referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 78 over headwork (barrages, dams,
reservoir, regulating constru ction), part of canal network an d transmission lines necessary to deliver
water or power to the States concerned.
(2) If any question arises as to whet her the Board has jurisdiction under sub -section ( 1) over any
project referred thereto, the same shall be referred to the Central Government for decision thereon.
82. Power to make regulations. —The Board may, with the prior approval of the Central
Governme nt by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and
orders m ade thereunder, to provide for —
(a) regulating the time and place of meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed
for the transaction of business at such meetings;
(b) delegation of powers and duties to the Chairman or any officer of the Board;
(c) the appointment and regulation of the conditions of service of the officers and other staff
of the Board; and
(d) any other matter for which regulations ar e considered necessary by the Board.
PART X
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
83. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 .—On and from the appointed day, in section 15 of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956, in clause ( c), for the word ―Bihar ‖, the words ―Bihar and Jharkhand ‖ shall be
substituted.
84. Territorial extent of laws. —The provisions of Part II of this Act shall not be deemed to have
effected any change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day
extends or applies, an d territorial references in any such law to the State of Bihar shall, until otherwise
provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority be construed as meaning the territories
within the existing State of Bihar before the appointed day.
85. Power to adapt laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of
Bihar or Jharkhand of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, before
the expiration of two years from that day, by order, make s uch adaptations and modifications of the law,
whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law
shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amen ded
by a competent Legislatur e or other competent authority.
Explanation .—In this section, the expression ―appropriate Government ‖ means as respects any law
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the Central Government, and as respects any other law
in its application to a State, the State Government.

86. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insuf ficient provision has been
made under section 85 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application
in relation to the State of Bihar or Jharkhand, construe the law in such manner, without affecting the
substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or autho rity.
87. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory func tions .—The Government of the
State of Jharkhand, as respects the transferred territory may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify the authority, o fficer or person who, on or afte r the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise
such functions exercisable under any law in force on that day as may be mentioned in that notification
and such law shal l have effect accordingly.
88. Legal proceedings .—Where immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Bihar is
a party to any legal proce edings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities subject to apportionment
between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand unde r this Act, the State of Bihar or Jharkhand which succeeds
to, or acquires a share in, that property or those rights or liabil ities by virtue of any provision of this Act
shall be deemed to be substituted for the existing State of Bihar or added as a part to those proceedings,
and the procee dings may continue accordingly.
89. Transfer of pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the
appointed day before a court (other than the High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which
on that day falls within the State of Bihar shall, if it i s a proceeding relating exclusively to the territory,
which as from that day is the territory of Jharkhand State, stand transferred to the corresponding court,
tribunal, auth ority or officer of that State.
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1),
it shall be referred to the High Court at Patna and the decision of that High Court shall be final.
(3) In this section —
(a) ―proceeding ‖ include s any suit, case or appeal; and
(b) ―corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer ‖ in the State of Jh arkhand means —
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom, the proceeding would
have laid if it had been instituted after the appointed day; or
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority, or officer in that State, as may be
determined after the appointed day by the Government of that State or the Central Government,
as the case may be, or before the appointed day by the Government of the existing State of Bihar
to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.
90. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases .—Any person who, immediately before the
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordina te courts in the existing State of
Bihar shall, for a period of one year from that day continue to be entitled to practise in those courts,
notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those courts has
been trans ferred to the State of Jharkhand.
91. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.
92. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpos e of removing the difficul ty:
Provid ed that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of thre e years from the
appointed day.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 8)
(i) Of the seven sitting members whose term of office will expire on 9th April, 2002, namely,
[Obaidullah Khan ], [Ven Dhamma Viriyo] , Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha, Shri Prem Chand Gupta,
Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav, Shri [Shatrughan Prasad Sinha ] and Shri Ram Deo Bhandari,
[Obaidullah Khan ] and [Ven Dhamma Viriyo ], shall be deemed to have been elected to fill two of the
seats allotted to the State of Jharkhand and the other five sitting members shall be deemed to have been
elected to fill five of the seats allotted to the State of Bihar.
(ii) Of the seven sitting members whose term of office will expire on 7th July, 2004, namely,
Shri Shibu Soren, Shri Gaya Singh, Shri Parmeshwar Kumar Agrawala, Shri Anil Kumar, Dr R.K. Yadav
Ravi, Shri Kapil Sibal, Smt. Saroj Dubey, Shri Shibu Soren and Shri Parmeshwar Kumar Agrawala shall
be deemed to have been elected to fill two of the seats allotted to the State of Jharkhand and the other five
sitting member s shall be deemed to have been elected to fill five of the seats allotted to the State of Bihar.
(iii) Of the eight sitting members whose term of office will expire on 2nd April, 2006, namely,
Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, Smt. Kum K um Rai, Shri Fa guni Ram, Shri Mahendra Prasad, Shri Ravi Shankar
Prasad, Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh, Shri Ram Kumar Anand and Shri Vijay Singh Yadav, Shri S.S.
Ahluwalia and Shri Ram Kumar Anand , shall be deemed to have been elected to fill two of the seats
allotted to the State of Jharkhand and the other six sitting members shall be deemed to have been elected
to fill six of the seats allotted to the State of Bihar.

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 10)
In the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, —
(i) in Schedule I —
(a) for serial number 3 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely: —
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
―3 Bihar 53 7 5 40 7 ..‖;
(b) after serial number 21, the following serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely: —

2 3 4 5 6 7
―21A Jharkhand .. .. 14 1 5..‖;
(ii) in Schedule II, —
(a) for serial number 3 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely: —

2 3 4 5 6 7
―3 Bihar 318 45 29 243 39 ..‖;
(b) after serial number 21, the following serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely: —

2 3 4 5 6 7
―21A Jharkhand .. .. 81 9 28‖;
(iii) in Schedule V ,—
(a) in Part A —Parliamentary Constituencies, —
(A) serial numbers 26 to 28, 44 to 54 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted;
(B) against serial number 29, —
(1) the entry ―158 Deoghar (SC) ‖ shall be omitted ;
(2) after entry ―176-Kataria ‖, the entry ―177-Chakai ‖ shall be inserted ;
(C) against serial number 30, the entry ―164-Mahagama ‖ shall be o mitted;
(D) against serial number 30, for the figures and words [ ―171-Sultanganj ‖ and ―173-Dhuraiya ‖
the figures, words and letters ―171-Sultanganj (SC) ‖ and ―173-Dhuraiya (SC) ‖ shall be substituted ];
(E) against serial number 40, after entry ―241-Goh‖, the entry ―251-Imamganj (SC) ‖ shall be
inserted;
(F) against serial number 42, for entry ―256-Atri‖, the entry ―255-Fatehpur (SC), 256 - Atri‖ shall
be substituted;
(G) against serial number 43, after entry ―253-Bodhgaya (SC) ‖, the entry ―254-Barachatti ( SC)‖
shall be inserted;
(b) in Part B —Assembly Constituency, serial number s 147 to 164, 262 to 324 and the entries
relating thereto shall be omitted.

(iv) after Schedule XXII, the following Schedule shall be inserted, namely: —

―SCHEDULE XXIIA
JHARKHAND
Part A. —PARLI AMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES

Serial No. Name and extent of constituencies
1. Rajmahal (ST). —l-Rajmahal, [2-Borio (S T)], 3-Barhait (ST), 4 -Litipara (S T), 5 -Pakaur,
6-Maheshpur (S T).
2. Dumka (ST). —7-Sikaripara (ST), 8 -Nala, 9 -Jamtara, 14 -Sarath, 10 -Dumka ( ST), 11 - Jama (S T).
3. Godda .—13-Madhupur, 15 -Deoghar (SC), 12 -Jarmundi, 16 -Poreyahat, 17 -Godda,18 -Mahagama.
4. Chatra.—27-Chatra (SC), 26 -Simaria (SC), 74 -Latehar (SC), 75 -Panki, 73 -Manika (ST).
5. Kodarma .—19-Kodarma, 20 -Barkatha, 28 -Dhanwar, 29 -Bagodar, 30 -Jamua (S C), 31-Gandey.
6. Giridih .—32-Giridih, 33 -Dumri, 34 -Gomia, 35 -Bermo, 42 - Tundi, 43 -Baghmara.
7. Dhanbad .—36-Bokaro, 38 -Sindri, 39 -Nirsa, 40 -Dhanbad, 41 -Jharia, 37 -Chandankiyari (SC).
8. Ranchi. —50-Ichagarh, 61 -Silli, 62 -Khijri (S T), 63-Ranchi; 64 -Hatia, 65 -Kanke (S C).
9. Jamshedpur. —[44-Bahragora ], 45 -Ghatsila (S T), 46 -Potka (ST), 47 -Jugsalai (S C),
48-Jamshedpur -East, 49 -Jamshedpur -West.
10. Singhbhum (ST) .—51-Seraikela (S T), 52-Chaibasa (ST), 53 -Majhgaon (S T),
54-Jaganathpur ( ST), 55 -Manoh arpur (ST), [56-Chakradharpur (S T)].
11. Khunti (ST) .—57-Kharsawar (ST), 58-Tamar (ST), 59 -Torpa (ST), 60 -Khunti (ST), 71 -Kolebira
(ST), 70 - Simdega (ST).
12. Lohardaga (ST). —66-Mandar ( ST), 67 -Sisai (ST), 68 -Gumla (S T), 69 -Bishunpur (ST),
[72-Loharda ga (ST)].
13. Palam au (SC). —76-Daltonganj, 80 -Garhwa, 81-Bhawanathpur, 77 -Bishrampur,
78-Chhatarpur (S C), 79 -Hussainabad.
14. Hazaribagh .—21-Barhi, 22 -Barkagaon, 23 -Ramgarh, 24 -Mandu, 25 -Hazaribagh.

PART B.—ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES
Serial No. Name and extent of constituencies
SAHE BGANJ DISTICT
1. Rajmahal .—Rajmahal and Sahebganj Polic e Stations in Rajmahal Sub -division.
2. Borio (ST) .—Borio and Taljhari Police Stations in Rajmahal sub -division; and Boarijor Police
Station (excl uding G.Ps. Rajabhita, Kero, Ka irasol, Bara Telo and Barapipra) in God da sub -division.
3. Barhait (ST). —Barhait and Ranga Police Stations in Rajmahal sub -division; and Sundarpahari
Police Station and G.Ps. Rajabhita, Kera, Kairasol, Bara Telo and Barapipra in Boa rijar Police Station in
Godda sub-division.
PAKAUR DISTRICT
4. Litipara (ST) .—Litipara, Amrapara and Hiranpur Police Stations in Pakaur sub -division; and
Gopikandar Police Station in Dumka Sadar sub -division.
5. Pakaur .—Pakaur Police Station in Pakaur sub -division; and Barharwa Police Station in Rajmahal
sub-division.
6. Mahaeshpur (ST) .—Maheshpur a nd Pakuria Police station in Pakaur sub -division.
DUMKA DISTRICT
7. Sikaripara (ST) .—Sikaripara, Raneshwar and kathikund Police Stations in Dumka Sadar
sub-division.
8. Nal a.—Nala and Kundahit Police Stations in Jamtara sub -division.
9. Ja mtara .—Jamtara Police Stations (excluding G.Ps. Karmata nr, Sahajpur, Pindari, Lakh anpur,
Rataniya, Rampurbhitra and Kajra) and Narayanpur Police Station in Jamtara sub -division.
10. Dumka (ST). —Dumka Town, Dumka Mufassil and Masalia Police Station s in Dumka Sadar
sub-division.
11. Jama (ST) .—Jama and Ramgarh Police Station s in Dumka Sadar sub -division.
12.Jarmundi. — Jarmundi Police Station in Dumka Sadar sub -division; and Sarawan Police Station
in Deoghar sub -division.
DEOGHAR DISTRICT
13. Madhupur. —Madhupur and Karon Police Stations and G.Ps . Kusmil, Chanddih, Pathra and
Basbariya in Jasid ih Police Station in Deoghar sub -division.
14. Sarath. —Sarath and Palojori Police Stations in Deoghar sub -division; and G.Ps. Karmatanr,
Sahajpur, Pindari, Lakhanpur, Rataniya, Rampurbhit ra and Kajra in Jamtara Police Station in Jamtara
sub-division.
15. Deogh ar (SC) .—Deoghar Town and Mohanp ur Police Stations and Jasidih Police Station
(excluding G.Ps. Kusm il, Chanddih, Pathra and Basbariya) in D eoghar sub -division .
GODDA DISTRICT
16. Poreyahat. —Poreyahat Police Station and G.Ps. Burhikura, Dammajhilua, Sandmara, Nonbatta,
Makhni, Pathra nad Punsiya in Godda Police Station in Godda sub -division; and Saraiyahat Police Stati on
in Dumka Sadar s ub-division.
17. Godda. —Godda Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Burhikura, dammajhilua, Sandmara, Nonbatta,
Makhni, Pat hra and Punsiya) and Pathargama Police Station in Godda sub -division.
18. Mahagama .—Mahagama and Meherma Police Stations in Godda sub -divis ion.

Serial No. Name and extent of constituencies
KODARMA DISTRICT
19. Kodarma .— Kodarma and [Satgawan ] Police Stations i n Kodarma sub-division.
HAZARIBAGH DISTRICT
20. Barkatha .— Barkatha and Jainagar Police S tations i n Kodarma s ub-division; ; and Ichak
Police Station in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division.
21. Barhi .—Barhi Police Station in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division; and Chauparan Police Station in
Kodarma sub -division .
22. Barkagaon .—Barakgaon Police Station and G.Ps. Terpa, Patratu, Koto, Palani,[Haphua ],
[Harih arpur], Gegda, Deoria, Bargama, Pali, Salgo, Sanki, Jabo, Chaingara, Chikor, Lapanga, Ghutua,
Barkakana and Sidhwar -Kalan in Ramgarh Police Station in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division.
23. Ramgarh. —Ramga rh Police Station (excluding G.P s. Terpa , Patratu, Koto, Palani,[Hap hua],
[Harih arpur ], Gegda, Deoria, Bargama, Pali, Salgo, Sanki, Jabo, [Chaingara] , Chikor, Lapanga, G hutua,
Barkakana and Sidhwar -Kalan) and Gola Police Station in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division.
24. Mandu.—Mandu and Bishungarh Police Stations in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division .
25. Hazaribagh .—Hazaribagh Police Station in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division.
CHATRA DISTRICT
26. Simaria (SC) .—Simaria, Itkhori and Tandwa Police Stations in Chatra sub -division .
27. Chatra (SC) .—Chatra, Pratappur and Hunterganj Police Stations in Chatra sub -divison.
GIRIDIH DISTRICT
28. Dhanwar .—Dhanwar and Gawan Police Stations in Giridih Sadar sub -division.
29. Bagodar .— Bagoda r and Birn i Police Stations in Giridih Sadar sub -division.
Jamua ( SC).—Jamua and Deori Police Stations in Giridih Sadar sub -division.
31. Gandey .—Gandey and Bengabad Police Stations and G.Ps. Leda, Semaria, Badgunda, Palmo,
Sathib ad, Senadoni, Dhanaidih, Guro, Jitpur, Telodih, Ranidih and Karharbari in Giridih Mufassil Police
Station in Giridih Sadar sub -division.
32. Giridih .—Giridih Town Police Station and Giridih Mufassil Police Station (excluding G.Ps.
Leda, Semaria, Badgunda, Palmo, Sathibad Senadoni, Dhanaidih, Guro, Jitpur, Telodih, Ran idih and
Karharbari) and Pir tanr Police Station in Giridih Sadar sub -division.
33. Dumri .—Dum ri Police Station in Giridih Sadar sub -division; and Nawadih Police Station in
Bermo sub -division.
BOKARO DISTRICT
34. Gomia .—Gomia Police Station and Petarbar Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Champi, Rohar,
Chando, Pichhri, Angwali and Chalkari) in Bermo sub -division.
35. Bermo .—Jaridih and Bermo Police Stations and G .Ps. Champ i, Rohar, Chando, Pichhri, Angwali
and Chalkari in Petarbar Police Station in Bermo sub -division.
36. Bokaro .—Chas Police Station (excluding G.Ps, Bijulia, Alkusa, Buribinor, Khamarbendi ,
Dudhigajar, Kura Dabartupara, Jaitara, Pundru and Sardaha) in Baghmara sub -division.
37. Chandankiyari (SC). —Chandankiyari Police Station and G.Ps . Bijulia, Al kusa, Buribinor,
Khamrbendi, Dhundhigajar, Kura, Dabartup ara, Jaitara, Pundu and Sardaha in Chas Police Station in
Baghmara sub -divison.

Serial No. Name and extent constituencies
DHANBAD DISTRICT
38. Sindri. —Sindri, Baliapur and Gobindpur Police Station in Dhanbad Sadar sub-division.
39. Nirsa. —Nirsa and Chirkunda Police Stations in Dhanbad Sadar sub -division .
40. Dhanbad. —Dhandad, Putki and Kenduadih Police Stations in Dhanbad Sadar sub -division.
41. Jharia. —Jharia and Jorapokhar Police Stations in Dhanbad Sadar sub -division.
42. Tundi. —Tundi Police Sta tion in Dhanbad Sadar sub -division; Topchanchi Police Station and
G.Ps. Dharkiro, Daluldih, Rajganj, Bagdaha, Dhawachita, Nagar kalan and Ramkanalichandur in Katras
Police Station in Baghmara sub -division.
43. Baghmara .—Baghmara Police Station and Katras Kalan Police (excluding G.Ps. Dharkiro,
Daludih, Rajganj, Bagdaha, Dha wachita, Nagri Kalan and Ramkanalichandur) in Baghmara
sub-division; and Jogta Police Station in Dhanbad Sadar sub -division.
(EAST ) SINGHBHUM DISTRICT
44. Baharagora. —Baharagora and Chakulia Police Station s in Dhalbhum sub -division.
45. Ghatsila (ST). —Ghatsila Police Station, [Musabani ] Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Palasbani,
Asta Koyali, Nunia, Kumarasoi, Barakanjiya, Boma ro B angoriya and Damud ih) in Dhalbhum
sub-divison.
46. Potka (ST). —Potka Police Station, G.Ps. Palasbani, Asta Koyali, Nunia , Kumarasol,
Barakanjiya, Bomar o Bangoriya and Damudih in [Musabani ] Police Station, Bagbera town and G.Ps.
Karadih –Purihasa, Haragarg hutu, Bagbera and village 1167 -Kitadih in Jugsalai Police Station in
Dhalbhum sub-division.
47. Jugsalai (SC). —Jugsalai Police Station (excluding Bagbera town an d G.Ps. Karandih -Purihasa,
Hargarghutu, Bagbera and village 1167 -Kitadih) Golmuri and Patamda Police Station in Dhalbhum
sub-division.
48. Jamshedpur East. —Census wards 20 and 23 to 40 in Jamshedpur Notified Area Committee in
Dhalbhum sub -divisio n.
49. Jamshedpur W est. —Jamshedpur Notified Area Committee (excluding census wards 20 and
to 40) in Dha lbhum sub -division.
(WEST ) SINGHBHUM DISTRICT
50. Ichagarh .—Ichagarh, Chandil and Nimdi h Police Station s in Seraikella s ub-division.
51. Seraikella (ST). —Seraikella municipality and G.Ps. Govindpur, Pandra, Manik Bazar, Tangani,
Pathanmara, Jordiha, Gurgudia and Badakakda in Seraikella Police Station, Rajnagar Police Station
(excluding village 98 -Dighi) and Adityapur Police Station in Sera ikella sub -division.
52. Chaibasa (ST). —Chaibasa Sadar and Jhinkpani Police Stations and Chaibasa Mufassil Police
Station (excluding G. Ps. Bhoya, Keadchalam, Domra -Parnia, Lota, Thakuragutu, Dopai -Gamhariya,
Sarda, Ma tkamhatu, Khuntpani, Chiru and Rajabasa ) in Chaibasa Sadar sub -division .
53. Majhgaon (ST). —Majhgaon and Manjhari Police Stations in Chaibasa Sadar sub -division.
54. Jaganathpur (ST). —Naomundi and Gua Police Stations and G.Ps. Kurtabera, Urkiya,
Makaramda, Thalkobad, (Part I) and Chhotanagra (Part I ) in M anoharpur Police Station in Chaibasa
Sadar sub -division .

Serial No. Name and extent of constituencies
55. Manoharpur (ST). —Manoharpur Police Station [excluding G. Ps. Kurtabera, Urkiya, Makaramda,
Thalkobad (Part I) and Chhotanagra (Part I)] and G.Ps. Beralumin, Jojoda, Serengda, Orenga, Jhilrua,
Goilkera, Kuira, Kadamdiha, Dalaikela, Sonua -Jorapokhar, Porahat, Sogoisai, Gudri Jarakel, Asantaliya,
Dalki -Gobindpur , Bhalurangi, Harimara, Tunian Gajpur, Bandu, Poronger, Koloeda, Kulda, Bari, Lonj o,
Bera Kayam, Mamail, Piring, Komrora, [Komrora -Dariyo], Dura -Jante and Banskata and Chakradharpur
Police Station in Chaibasa Sadar sub-division.
56. Chakradharpur (ST) .—-Chakradharpur Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Beralumin, Jojoda,
Serengda, Orenga, Jhilrua, Goilkera, Kuira, Kadamdiha, Dalaikela, Sonua -Jorapokhar, Porahat, Sogoisai,
Gudri Jarakel, Asantaliya, Dalki -Gobindpur, Bhalurangi, Harimara, Tunian Gajpur, Bandu, Poronger,
Koloeda, Kulda, Bari, Lonjo, Bera Kayam, m amail, Piring, Komrora, Komrora -Dariyo, Dura -Jante and
Banskata) in Chaibasa Sadar sub -division.
57. Kharsawan (ST). —Kharsawan and Kuchai Police Stations and Seraikella Police Station
(excluding Ser aikella municipality and G.Ps. Govindpur, Para, Manik Bazar, Tangrani, Pathanmara,
Jordiha Gurugudia and Badakakda) and village 98 -Dighi in Rajnagar Police Station in Seraikella
sub-division; and G.Ps. Bhoya Keadchalam, Domra -Pamia, Lota, Thakurgutu, Dopai -Gamhariya, Sarda,
Matkamhatu -Khuntpani, Chiru and Rajabasa in Ch aibasa Mufassil Police Station in Chaibasa Sadar
sub-division.
RANCHI DISTRICT
58. Tamar (ST). —Tamar, Erki and Bundu Police Stations in Khunti sub -divisions.
59. Torpa (ST) .—Torpa and Rania Police Stations and G.Ps. G umru, Cobindpur, Tilmi, Lapa,
Jariagarh, Urikel and Hutub and Karra Police Station in Khunti sub -division; and Bano Police Station in
Simdega sub -divison.
60. Khunti (ST). —Khunti and Murhu Police Stations and Karra Police Station ( excluding G.Ps.
Gumru, Gobindpur , Tilmi, Lapa, J ariagarh, Urikel and Hutub) in K hunti sub -divison.
61. Silli.—Silli Police Station, G .Ps. Barwadag, Tati, Jonha, Kashidih, Merha, Ambajharia and
Kontatoli and Angara Police Station in Ranchi Sadar sub -division; and Sonahatu Police Station in Khunti
sub-division.
62. Khijri (ST) .—Ormanjhi, [Namkum ] and Hatia Police Stations and Angara Police Station
(excluding G .Ps. Barwadag, Tati, J onha, Kashidih
63. Ranchi .—Ranchi municipality in Ranchi Kotwali Police Station in Ranchi Sadar sub-division.
64. Hatia.—Jaganathpur, Ratu and Doranda Police Stations and Ranchi Kotwali Police Station
(excluding Ranchi municipality) in Ranchi Sadar s ub-division.
65. Kanke (SC) .—Kanke, Ranchi Sadar, Burmu and Khelari Police Stations in Ranchi Sadar
sub-division .
66. Mandar (ST) .—Bero, Mandar and Lapung Police Stations, in Ranchi Sadar sub -division .
GUMLA DISTRICT
67. Sisai (ST). —Sisai, Kamdara and Basia Police Stations in Gumla sub -division.
68. Gumla (ST). —Gumla Municipality, G.Ps. Hurhuria, Ghatagaon, Asani, Chandali, Telgaon, Pugu,
Bangaru, Karaundi, Dumardih and Murkunda in Gumla Police Station and Raidih, Chainpur and Dumri
Police Stations in Gumla sub -division.
69. Bishunpur (ST) .—-Bishunpur and Ghaghra Police Stations and Gumla Police Station (excluding
Gumla municipality and G.Ps. Hurhuria, Ghatagaon, Asani, Chandali, Telgaon, Pugu, Bangaru, Karaundi,
Dumardih and Murkunda) in Gumla sub-division; and Senha Police Station in Lohardaga sub -division .

Serial No. Name and extent of constituencies
70. Simdega (ST).—Simdega and Kurdeg Police Stations in Simdega sub -division; and Palkot Police
Station in Gumla sub -division.
71. Kolebira (ST ).—Kolebira, Thethaitangar and Bolba Police Stations in Simdega sub-division.
LOHARDAGA DISTRICT
72. Lohardaga( ST). —Lohardaga K uru and Kisko Police S tations in Lohardaga sub-division.
PALAMAU DISTRICT
73. Manika (ST). —Latehar Police Station (excluding Latehar (N.A.C.) and G.Ps. Pochra , Luti,
Kaima, Kura, Bishunpur, Mungar, Nindir, Laharpur and Zalim), Barwadih, Garoo and Mahuadanr Police
Stations in Latehar sub -division.
74. Latehar (SC) —Latehar (N.A.C.), G.Ps. Pochra, Luti, Kaima, Kura, Bishunpur, Mungar, Nindir,
Laharpur and Zalim in Latehar Police Station, Chandwa and Balumath Police Station in Latehar
sub-division.
75. Panki .—Pank i, Lesliganaj and Manatu Police Station i n Palamu Sadar sub-division.
76. Daltonganj .—Daltonganj and Chainpur Police Station in Palam au Sadar sub -division; and
Bhandaria Police Station in Garhwa sub -division .
77. Bishrampur. —Bishrampur Police Station in Palam au Sadar sub -division; and Majhiaon Police
Station in Garhwa sub -division.
78. Chhatarpur (SC) .—Chhatarpur and Patan Police Station in Palam au Sadar sub -division.
79. Hussainabad .—Hussainabad and Hariharganj Police Station in Palamau Sadar sub-division.
GARHWA DISTRICT
80. Garhwa .—Garhwa P olice Station (excluding G.Ps. Jarhi Balekhar Raro, S onehara and Dandai)
and Ranka Police Station in Garhwa sub -division.
81. Bhawa nathpur .—Bhawan athpur a nd Nagar Untari Police Station and G.Ps. J arhi, Balekhar,
Raro, Sonehara and Dandai in Garhwa Police Station in Garhwa sub -division.

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
(See section 17)
SITTING MEMBERS WHO SHALL CONTINUE TO BE MEMBERS OF THE
BIHAR LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL TILL THEIR RESPECTIVE
PRESENT TERMS OF OFFICE
(i) Mem bers representing any of the eleven Constituencies specified in item ( 1) of the
[Fourth Schedule ].
(ii) The following members elected by the members of the Bihar Legislative Assembly,
namely: —
―1. Shri Sarfaraj A hmed .
2. Shri Saryu Rai .
3. Shri Mahavir Lal Vishwakarma .
4. Shri Bhutnath Soren .
5. Shri Rajendranath S hahdev .
6. Smt. Vibha Ranjan .
7. Shri Badri Narayan Lal.
8. Shri Praveen Singh .‖.

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
(See section 18)
AMENDMENTS TO THE DELIMITA TION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES
(BIHAR) ORDER, 1951
(1) In the Table , omit the entries relating to —
(i) Bhagalpur -cum-North Chhotanagpur (Graduates) Constituency;
(ii) South Chhotanagpur (Graduates) Constituency;
(iii) Bhagalpur -cum-North Chhotanagpur (Teachers) Constituency;
(iv) South Chhotanagpur (Teachers) Constituency;
(v) Santhal Parganas (Local Authorities) Constituency; .
(vi) Hazaribagh (Local Authorities) Constituency;
(vii) Giridih (Local Authorities) Constituency;
(viii) Ranchi (Loc al Authorities) Constituency;
(ix) Palamau (Local Authorities) Constituency;
(x) Dhanbad ( Local Authorities) Constituency;
(xi) East Singhbhum -cum-West Singhbhum (Local Authorities) Constituency.
(2) In the Table, in column 2,—
(i) against ―Kosi (Graduates) Constituency ‖ in column 1, after the word ―khagaria ‖, insert the
words ―Bhagalpur Monghyr ‖;
(ii) against ―Kosi (Teachers) Constituency ‖ in column I, after the word ―Khagaria ‖, insert the
words ―Bhagalpur Monghyr ‖.

THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
(See Section 23)
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes ) Order, 1950, in the Schedule ,—
(i) in Part III relating to State of Bihar, in item No. 5, the brackets and words ‖ (excl uding North
Chhotanagpur and South Chhotanagpur divisions and Santal Parg anas district) ‖, shall be omitted;
(ii) after Part VI, Himachal Pradesh, the follo wing shall be inserted, namely: —
“PART VIA –Jharkhand

1. Bantar
[2. Baur i]
3. Bhogta
4. Bhuiya
5. Chamar, Mochi
[6. Chaupal]
[7. Dabg ar]
8. Dhobi
9. Dom, Dhangad
10. Dusadh, Dhari, Dharhi
11. Ghasi
12. Halalkhor
[13. Hari, Mehtar, Bhangi ]
14. Kanjar
[15. Kura riar]
16. Lalbegi
17. Musahar
18. Nat
19. Pan, Sawasi
20. Pasi
21. Rajwar
22. Turi.‖

THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
(See section 24)
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950
In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, —
(1) in paragraph 2, for the figures ―XXI‖, the figures ―XXII ‖ shall be substituted;
(2) in the Schedule, —
(i) in Part III relating to State of Bihar, the item No. 6 and the entries relating thereto, shall be
omitted, and the item Nos. 7 to 30 shall be renumbered as item Nos. 6 to 29;
(ii) after Part X XI, the following Part shall be inserted, namely: —
“PART XXII –Jharkhand
1. Asur
2. Baiga
3. Banjara
4. Bhathudi
5. Bedia
6. Binjhia
7. Birhor
8. Birjia
9. Chero
[10. Chik Baraik]
11. Gond
12. Gorait
13. Ho
14. Karmali
15. Khanria
16. Kharwar
17. Khond
18. Kisan
19. Kora
20. Korwa
21. Lohra
22. Mahli
[23. Mal Paharia]
24. Munda
25. Oraon
26. Parhaiya
[27. Santal]
28. Sauria Paharia
29. Savar
30. Bhumij .‖.

THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 46 ( 1)]
(Investment s and Credits in certain funds )
1. State Provident Funds.
2. Trusts and Endowments.
3. Insurance and Pensions Funds.
4. Depreciation Reserve Funds —relating to Government Commercial Departments and
Undertakings.
5. Famine Relief Funds.
6. Investment Account.
7. Development Fund for Educational Purposes.
8. General Reserve Funds of Government Commercial Departments Undertakings.
9. Zamindari Abolition Funds.
10. Calamity Relief Fund Investment Account
11. Revenue Deposits.
12. Security Deposits.
13. Civil Courts' Deposits.
14. Criminal Courts' Deposits.
15. Personal Deposits.
16. Trust Interest Funds.
17. Public Works Deposits .
18. Forest Deposits.
19. Deposits of Public Funds.
20. Other Departmental Deposits.
21. Deposits under various Central and State Acts.
22. Deposits for work done for Public bodies or private individuals.
23. Deposits of fees received by Government servants for works done for private bodies.
24. Deposits in connection with Elections.
25. Mines Labour Welfare Deposits .
26. Deposits of Educational Institutions.
27. Unclaimed Deposits in the General Provident Fund.
28. Unclaimed Deposits in other Provident Fund s.
29. Deposits on account of cost price of Liquor, Ganja and Bhang.
30. District Funds .
31. Municipal Funds.
32. Cantonment Funds.
33. Funds of Insurance Association.
34. State Transport Corporation Fund.

35. State Electricity Boards Working.
36. State Housing Funds.
37. Panchayats Bodies Funds.
38. Education Funds.
39. Medical and Charitable Funds.
40. Other Funds.
41. Subventions from Central Road Fund.
42. Miscellaneous Deposits.

THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE
(See section 53)
APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS AND OTHER
RETIREMENT BENEFITS
1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of the successor State shall in respect of
pension and other retirement benefits sanctioned before the appointed date, pay from their respective
treasuries .
2. Subject to the said adjustment, the liability in respect of pensions and other retirement b enefits of
officers serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar who retire or proceed on leave
preparatory to reti rement before the appointed day, but whose c laims for pensions and other retirement
benefits are outstanding immediately before that day, shall be the liability of the State of Bihar.
3. Subject to the said adjustments, sanctions of such pension and other retirement benefits by the
competent authority may be given in those cases, in which their office falls in the territory of Jharkhand
State.
4. There shall be computed, in respect of the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on
the 31st day of March of the financial year and in respect of each subsequent financial year, the total
payments made in all the successor States in respect of pensions and other retirement benefits referred to
in paragraphs 1 and 2. The total representing the liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of
pensions and other retirement benefits shall be apportioned between the successor States in the ratio of
number of employees of each successor State and any successor State paying more than its due share shall
be reimbursed the excess amount by the successor State or State paying less.
5. The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of pen sions and other retirement benefits
granted before the appointed day and drawn in any area outside the territories of the existing State shall
be the liability of the State of Bihar paying subject to adjustments to be made in accordance with
paragraph 3 as if such pensions and oth er retirement benefits had been drawn in any treasury in the State
of Bihar under paragraph 1.
6. The liability in respect of the pensions and other retirement benefits of any officer serving
immediately before the appointed day i n connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar and
retiring on or after that day, shall be that of the successor State granting him the pension and other
retirement benefits, but the portion of the pension and other retirement benefits attrib utable to the service
of any such officer before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar
shall be allocated between the successor States in the population ratio and the Government granting the
pension and other retir ement benefits shall be entitled to receive from each of the other successor Stat es
its share of this liability.
7. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension and other retirement benefits shall be construed as
including a reference to the commuted value of the pension and other retirement benefits.

THE NINTH SCHEDULE
[See section 65( 1)]
LIST OF STATE OWNED CORPORATIONS/COMPANIES
1. Bihar State Industries Development Corporation.
2. Bihar State Leather Development Corporation.
3. Bihar State Electronics Development Corporation.
4. Bihar State Sugar Corporation Limited.
5. Bihar State Medicine and Chemical Development Corporation.
6. Bihar State Fruit and Vegetable s Development Corporation.
7. Bihar State Dairy Corporation Limited.
8. Bihar State Agro Industries Corporat ion.
9. Bihar State Text iles Corporation Limited.
10. Bihar State Small Industries Corporation Limited.
11. Bihar State Handloom and Handicrafts Corporation
12. Bihar State Khadi Gramudyog Board
13. Bihar State Agriculture Marketing Board.
14. Bihar State Forest Development Corp oration Limited.
15. Bihar State Export Development Corporation Limited.
16. Bihar State Seeds Corporation Limited.
17. Bihar State Fish Seeds Development Corporation Limited.
18. Bihar State Warehousing Corporation.
19. Bihar State Tourism Development Corporation Limited.
20. Bihar State Road Transport Corporation.
21. Bihar State Food and Civil Supplies Corporaiton.
22. Bihar State Text Book Publishing Corporation Limited.
23. Bihar State Construction Corporation Limited.
24. Bihar State Mineral Development Corporation Limited.
25. Bihar State Ho using Board.
26. Bihar State Bridge Construction Corporation Limited.
27. Bihar State Police Building Construction Corporation Limited.
28. Bihar State Electricity Board.
29. Bihar State Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited.
30. Bihar State Hill Area and Irrigation Develop ment Limited.
31. Patna Industrial Area Development Authority.
32. Bokaro Industrial Area Development Authority.
33. Ranchi Industrial Area Development Authority.
34. Adityapur Industrial Area Development Authority.
35. North Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority.
36. Darbh anga Industrial Area Development Authority.

37. Patna Area Development Authority.
38. Ranchi Area Development Authority
39. Muzaffarpur Area Development Authority.
40. Darbhanga Area Development Authority.
41. Gaya Area Development Authority.
42. Bihar State Pollution Control Board.
43. Bihar State Water and Sewage Disposal Board.
44. Bihar State Financial Corporation.
45. Bihar State Credit and Investment Corporation Limited.
46. Bihar State Panchayati Raj Finance Development Corporation Limited.
47. Bihar State Minorities Finance Corporation Lim ited.
48. Bihar State Film Development and Finance Corporation Limited.
49. Electricity Corporation Limited.
50. Mines Area Development Authority, Dhanbad.
51. Hazaribagh Mines Board.
52. Bhagalpur Regional Development Authority, Bhagalpur .
53. Women’s Development Corporation.
54. Backward Classes Development Corporation.
55. Scheduled Castes Development Corporation
56. Scheduled Tribes Development Corporation.

THE TENTH SCHEDULE
(See section 70)
CONTINUANCE OF FACILITIES IN CERTAIN STATE INSTITUTIONS
List of Training Institution/Centres

1. Sri Krishna Institute of Public Administration.
2. Police Training College.
3. Bihar Institute of Rural Development.
4. Village Handicrafts Training Centre.
5. Tribal Village Handicraft Training Centres.
6. Training -cum-Production Centres for Toys, Ceramic Goods, Embroidery and Applique,
Hornmade goods and Cutting and Tailoring.
7. Ideal Woodwork Workshops/Iron Workshops.
8. Indo Danish Tool Room and Training Centre, Jamshedpur.
9. All Gover nment Industrial Institutes .
-Affiliated with N.C.V. T.
-Un-affiliated .
10. All Private Industrial Institutes.
-Affiliated with N.C.V.T. ;
-Un-affiliated.
11. B.I.T., Sindri.
12. R.I. T., Jamshedpur.
13. Government Polytechnic, Dhanbad.
14. Government Polytechnic, Ranchi.
15. Government Polytechnic, Adityapur.
16. Government Polytechnic, Khutri.
17. Government Polytechnic, Lathehar.
18. Government Women's Polytechnic, Jamshedpur.
19. Government Women's Polytechnic, Ranchi.
20. Government Women's Polytechnic, Bokaro.
21. Mines Institution, Dhanbad.
22. Mines institution, Bagha.
23. Mines Institution, Koderma.
24. Government Polytechnic, Dumka.
25. Government Women's Industrial School, Ranchi.
26. Government Women's Industrial School, Hazaribagh.
27. Government Women's Industrial School, Daltonganj.
28. Sainik School, Tilaiya.
29. Netarhat School.
30. Indir a Gandhi Girls School, Hazaribag h.