An Act to provide for the regulation of rents, repairs and maintenance and
eviction relating to premises and matters connected therewith in the Stateof
Punjab .
BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Forty sixth Year of the Republic of India, as follows: -
1. (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Rent Act, 1995.
(2) It extends to all urban areas of Punjab, but nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to affect the regulation of house
accommodation in any cantonment area.
(3) It shall be applicable to all the residential and non -residential
buildings.
(4) It shall come into force1 on such date as the State
Government may specify in this behalf in th e Official Gazette.

extent,
application and
commencement.

CHAPTER -I
PRELIMINARY
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -
[(a) "Appellate Authority " means the Appellate Authority
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 50 of this
Act;]
[(b) ***];
(c) "Landlord" means a person who, for the time being is
receiving or is entitled to receive the rent of any
premises, whether on his own account or on account
of or on behalf of, or for the benefit of any other
person or as a trustee, guardian or receiver for any
other person or who would so receive the rent or be
entitled to receive t he rent, if the premises were let to
a tenant;
(d) "Lawful increase" means an increase in the rent
permitted under the provisions of this Act;
[(e) ***];
(f) "non -residential premises" means premises being
used solely for the purpose of business or trade;
Provided that the residence in the premises only for the purpose of
guarding it shall not be deemed to convert a "non -residential premises" to a
"residential premises";
(g) "Premises" means any building or part of a building
which i s or is intended to be let separately, for use a

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 2
2Omitted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 2
3Omitted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 2 Definitions.

residence or for non - residential use or for any other
purpose, and includes, -
(i) the garden ground and out -houses, if any,
appertaining to such building or part of building
but does not include the upper side of roof
(Terrace);
(ii) any fittings to such building or part of the
building for the more beneficial enjoyment
thereof;
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(i) "Rent Authority" means an authority appointed under
sub-section (1) of Section 36 and includes an
additional Rent Authority appointed under sub section (2) of that secti on;
(j) "residential premises" means any building which is
not non - residential premises;
[(k) ***];
(l) "SCF" means a Shop -cum-Flat but the shop and flat
will be treated as two separate premises i.e. shop as
Non-residential or commercial building and flat as
residential building. In case of composite r ent
agreement the rent for residential premises will be
treated equal to one -third of total rent ;
(m) "tenant" means any person by whom or on whose
account or behalf the rent of any premises is or, but
for special contract, would be payable, and include, (i) a sub -tenant;

1Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 2

(ii) any person continuing in possession after
the termination of hi s tenancy, but does
not include -
(I) any person against whom an order or
decree for eviction has been made, except
where such decree or order for eviction is liable
to be re - opened;
(II) any person to whom a licence as defined
in section 52 of the Indian Easements Act,
1882, has been granted;
[(n) ***];
(o) "urban area" means any area administered by a
Municipal Corporation, Municipal Council, Nagar
Panchayat, or a Cantonment Board or any area
declared by the State Government, by notification in
the Off icial Gazette, to be urban for the purposes of
this Act.
[3. (1) Nothing in this Act shall apply, -
(a) to any premises let out before the commencement of
this Act;
(b) to any premises belonging to or let out to the State
Government or the Government of India or a local
authority;
(c) to any premises constructed on or after the
commencement of this Act, for a period of fifteen
years from the date of completion of co nstruction;

1Omitted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 2
2Substituted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 3 Premises
exempted
from the
operation of
the Act.

Explanation I. - The expression "date of completion of construction" shall
mean the date of completion as intimated to the concerned authority o r of
assessment to property tax, whichever is earlier, and, where the premises
has been constructed in stages, the date on which the initial building was
completed and an intimation thereof was sent to the concerned authority or
was assessed to property tax, whichever is earlier.
Explana tion II. - The expression "premises constructed" shall include -
(i) re-building of more than seventy -five per cent of an
existing building; and
(ii) additional construction to an existing building;
(d) to any premises let out to citizens of a foreign country or an
embassy, H igh commission, legation or commission of a
foreign State or such international organization, as may be
specified by the State Government, by notification in the
Official Gazette;
(e) to any premises belonging to such religious, charitable or
education al trust or class of trusts, as may be specified by the
State Gover nment, by notification in the Official Gazette;
(f) to any premises let out by a hire -purchaser, lessee or sub lessee (by whatever name called), who has been allotted such
premises by the Punjab Urban Development Authority or any
other local authority by w ay of an agreement of hire purchase, lease or sub -lease, even before the full ownership
rights accrue to such hire -purchaser, lessee or sub -lessee, as
the case may be.

(2) For non -residential premises, contract renting shall be
admissible during the subsisting period of contract. Such premises shall be
governed by the conditions of the contract and litigation under any other
law shall not be permissible. A landlord violating the conditions laid down
in the contract and agreed to by the parties shall not be entitled for rent for
the period of violation and if the tenant violates the conditions, he shall be
liable to pay double the rent for the period, in question, in addition to
immediate disposs ession through the Rent Authority. ]
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 107 of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882, no person shall, after the commencement
of this Act, let or take on rent any premises exce pt by an agreement in
writing.
[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Act,
(16 of 1908), every agreement referred to in sub -section (1) shall be
in the Form specified in Schedule I appended to this Act and shall be
registered under and in accordance with the provisions of the Registration
Act 1908 by the authority specified thereunder, on payment of registra tion
fee of rupee one thousand.]
5. (1) In the event of death of a tenant, the right of tenancy shall
devolve for a period of ten years from the date of his death to his
successors in the following orders, namely: -
(a) Spouse;
(b) Son or daughter or where the re are both son and
daughter both of them;
(c) Parents; and

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 3 Registration of
tenancy
agreement.
Inheritability of
tenancy.

(d) Daughter -in-law, being th e widow of his pre deceased son :
Provided that the successor has ordinarily been living in the
premises with the deceased tenant as a member of his family upto the date
of his death and was dependent on the deceased tenant :
Provided further that a right to tenancy shall not devolve upon a
successor in case such successor or his spouse or any of his dependent son
or daughter is owning or occupying a residential premises in the same
urban area.
(2) If a person, being a successor specified in sub -section (1),
was ordinarily living in the premises with the deceased tenant but was not
dependent on him on the date of his death, or he or his spouse or any of his
dependent son or daughter is owning or occupying a residential premises in
the same urban area, such successor shall acquire a right to continue in
possession as a tenant for a limited period of one year from the date of
death of the tenant and, on the expiry of that period, or on his death,
whichever is earlier, the right of su ch successor to continue in possession
of the premises shall become extinguished.
Explanation. - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that -
(a) where, by reason of sub -section (2), the right of any
successor to continue in possession of the premises
become extinguished, such extinguishment shall not
affect the right of any other successor of the same
category to continue in possession of the premi ses but
if there is no other successor of the same category, the
right to continue in possession of the premises, shall
not, on such extinguishment, pass on to any other

successor specified in any lower category or
categories, as the case may be.
(b) the right of every successor, referred to in sub -section
(1) to continue in possession of the premises shall be
personal to him and shall not, on the death of such
successor, devolve on any of his heirs.
(3) Nothing in sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) shall apply to a
non-residential premises and the vacant possession of such premises shall
be delivered t o the landlord within one year, -
(i) of the death of the tenant, in case the tenant is an
individual;
(ii) of the dissolution of the firm, in case the tenant is a
firm;
Explanation. - If all the partners of the firm as on the date of hiring the
premises leave the firm, it shall be deemed that the firm stands dissolved.
(iii) of the winding up of the company, in case the tenant
is a "company", as defined in the Companies Act,
1956.
(iv) of the dissolution of the corporate body other than a
company in case the tenant is such a corporate body.

CHAPTER II
RENT
[6. The Rent payable in relation to the premises shall be agreed rent
between the landlord and the tenant:
Provided that the agreed rent shall be increased by five per cent of
the last rent for two years and thethird year increase shall be based upon
the increase in the Consumer Price index over the corresponding three
years.
Example. - If the Consumer Price Index increases by eighteen per
cent in three years, the rent for the fourth year shall be the rent for the
first year multiplied by one point eight een. This cycle shall continue. ]
[7. ****]
8. (1) A tenant shall be liable to pay the landlord, besides the rent ,
the following charges, namely :-
(a) maintenance charges at the rate of ten per cent of the
rent; and
(b) without prejudice to the liability of the landlord to pay
the property tax to the local authority, the pro rata
property tax in relation to the premises.
Explanation. - For the purpose of calculating the monthly charges payable
by the tenant to the landlord towards the property tax, the amount paid or
payable as tax for the immediately preceding year or the estimated tax
payable shall form the basis.

Substituted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 5
2Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 6 Payable
Rent.
Other
charges
payable.

(2) The landlord shall be entitled to recover from the tenant the
amount paid by him towards charges for electricity or water consumed or
other charges levied by a local or oth er authority which is ordinarily
payable by the tenant.
9. [(1) Where a landlord has, at any time, with or without the
approval of the tenant, incurred expenditure for any improvement, addition
or structural alteration in the premises not being expenditure on decoration
or tenantable repairs necessary or usual for such premises, and the cost of
that improvement, addition or alteration has not been taken into account in
determining the rent of the premises, the landlord may lawfully increase
the rent per year by an amount not exceeding ten per cent of such cost .]
(2) Where, after the rent of a premises has been fixed under this
Act, or agreed upon, as the case may be, there has been a decrease,
diminution or deterioration of accommodation in such premises, the tena nt
may claim reduction in the rent.
10. (1) Where a landlord intends to revise the rent of any premises
under sub-section (1) of section 9, he shall give to the tenant a notice in
Form as specified in Schedule V to this Act, of his intention to make the
revision and, in so far as such revision is lawful under this Act, it shall be
due and recoverable from the date of improvement, addition or structural
alteration.
(2) Every notice under sub -section (1) shall be in writing signed
by or on behalf of the landlord and given in the manner provided in section
o f the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 7 Revision of
rent in certain
cases.
Notice of
revision of
rent.

[(3) ***]
[11& 12 . ****]
13. (1) Every tenant shall pay rent and other charges payable to the
landlord within the time fixed by contract or in the absence of such
stipulation, by the fifteenth day of the month next following the month for
which it is payable and where any default occurs in the payment of rent or
other charges, the tenant shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of
fifteen per cent per annum from the date on which such payment of rent
and other charges payable is due to the date on which it is paid.
(2) Every tenant who makes payment of rent or other charges
payable or advance towards such rent or other charges to his landlord in
cash shall be entitled, to obtain forthwith from the landlord or his
authorised agent a written receipt for the amount paid to him, signed by the
landlord or his authorised agent :
Provided that it shall be open to the tenant to remit the rent
to his landlord by postal money order.
(3) If the landlord or his authorised agent refuses or neglects to
deliver to the tenant the receipt referred to in sub -section (2), the Rent
Authority may, on an application made to him in this behalf by the tenant
within two months from the date of payment and after hearing the landlord
or his authorised agent, by order direct the landlord or his authorised agent
to pay to the tenant, by way of damages, such sum not exceeding double
the amount of rent or other charges paid by the tenant and the costs of the
application and s hall also grant a certificate to the tenant in respect of the
rent or other charges paid.

1Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 8
2Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 9 Receipt to be
given for rent
paid.

(4) If the landlord supplies the particulars of his bank account
the tenant shall deposit the rent and other charges payable in such bank
account as and when due.
14. (1) Where the landlord does not accept any rent and other
charges payable tendered by the tenant within the time and the manner
referred to in section 13 or refuses or neglects to deliver a receipt referred
to therein or where there is a bona fide doubt as to the person or persons to
whom the rent and other charges are payable, the tenant may deposit such
rent and other charges payable with the Rent Authority according to the
provisions of sub -section (2) below.
(2) The deposit shall be accompanied by an applicatio n by the
tenant containing th e following particulars, namely :-
(a) the premises for which the rent and other charges
payable are deposited with a description sufficient for
identifying the premises;
(b) the period for which the rent and other charges payable
are deposited;
(c) the name and address of the landlord or the person or
persons clai ming to be entitled to such rent and other
charges payable; and
(d) the reasons and circumstances for which the
application for depositing the rent and other charges
payable is made.
(3) If an application is made for the withdrawal of any deposit of
rent and other charges payable, the Rent Authority shall, if satisfied that Deposit of
rent

the applicant is the person entitled to receive the rent and other charges
deposited, order the amount of the rent and other charges to be paid to him:
Provided that no order for payment of any deposit of rent and other
charges payable shall be made by the Rent Authority under this sub -section
without giving all the persons named by the tenant in his application under
sub-section (2) as claiming to be entitled to payment of such rent and other
charges payable, an opportunity of being heard and such order shall be
without prejudice to the rights of such persons to receive such rent and
other charges payable being decided by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(4) If at the time of filing the application under sub -section (3)
but not after the expiry of thirty days from receiving the notice of deposit,
the landlord or the person or persons claiming to be entitled to the rent and
other charges payable complains or complain to the Rent Authority that the
statements in the tenant's application of the reasons and ci rcumstances
which led him to deposit the rent and other charges payable are untrue, the
Rent Authority, after giving the tenant an opportunity of being heard, may
levy, on the tenant a fine which may extend to an amount equal to two
months’ rent and if the Rent Authority is satisfied that the said statements
were materially untrue it may order that a sum out of the fine realised be
paid to the landlord as compensation.
(5) The Rent Authority may, on the complaint of the tenant and
after giving an opportunity to the landlord of being heard, levy on the
landlord a fine which may extend to an amount to two months' rent and if
the Rent Authority is satisfied that the landlord without any reasonable
cause, refused to accept rent and other charges payable though tendered to
him within the time referred to in section 13 it may further order that a
portion of the fine realised be paid to the tenant as compensation.

15. (1) No rent and other charges deposited under section 14 shall
be consider ed to have been validly deposited under that section, unless the
deposit is made within twenty -one days of the time referred to in section
for payment of the rent and other charges payable and intimation to that
effect with full particulars has been sen t to the landlord. Non -intimation to
the landlord s hall render the deposit 'INVALID '.
(2) No such deposit shall be considered to have been validly
made, if the tenant wilfully makes any false statement in his application for
depositing the rent and other charges payable unless the landlord has
withdrawn the amount deposited before the date of filing an application for
the recovery of possession of the premises from the tenant.
(3) If the rent and other charges payable are deposited within the
time specified in sub -section (1) and do not cease to be a valid deposit for
the reasons specified in sub -section (2), the deposit shall constitute
payment of rent and other charges payable to the landlord, as if the amount
deposited has been validly tendered.
16. (1) The withdrawal of rent and other charges payable deposited
under section 14 in the manner provided therein shall not operate as an
admission against the person withdrawing it of the correctnes s of the rate
of rent and other charges payable for the period of default, the amount due
or of any other facts stated in the tenant's application for depositing the rent
and other charges payable under the said section.
(2) Any rent and other charges payable in deposit which are not
withdrawn by the landlord or by the person or persons entitled to receive
such rent and other charges payable shall be forfeited to Government by an
order made by the Re nt Authority, if they are not withdrawn before the Time limit for
making deposit
and
consequences
of incorrect
particulars in
application for
deposit.
Saving as to
acceptance of
rent and other
charges payable
and forfeiture in
deposit.

expiration of five years from the date of receiving the intimation of
deposit.
(3) Before passing an order of forfeiture, the Rent Authority
shall give notice to the landlord or the person or persons entitled to receive
the rent and other charges in deposit by registered post at the last known
address of such landlord or person or persons and shall also publish the
notice in his office and in any lo cal newspaper.
CHAPTER III
REPAIRS OF PREMISES
17. (1) Subject to the contract in writing to the contrary every
landlord shall be bound to keep the premises in good and tenantable repairs
in relation to matters falling under Part A of Schedule II to this Act.
Explanation. - The expression "Good and tenantable repairs" under this
section and section 18 shall mean such repairs as shall keep the premises in
the same condition in which it was let out except for the normal wear and
tear.
(2) Where any repairs, in relation to a matter falling under Part
A of Schedule II to th is Act without which the premises are not habitable
or useable except with undue inconvenience are to be made and the
landlord neglects or fails to make them within a period of three months
after notice in writing, the tenant may apply to the Rent Authorit y for
permission to make such repairs himself and may submit to the Rent
Authority an estimate of the cost of such repairs and, thereupon the Rent
Authority may, after giving the landlord an opportunity of being heard and
after considering such estimate of the cost and making such inquiries as it
may consider necessary, by an order in writing, permit the tenant to make
such repairs at such cost as may be specified in the order and it shall Duties of
landlord.

thereafter be lawful for the tenant to make such repairs himself and to
deduct the cost thereo f, which shall in no case except the amount so
specified, from the rent or otherwi se recover it from the landlord :
Provided that the amount so deducted or recoverable from rent in
any year shall not exceed one -half of the rent payable by the tenant for that
year and any amount remaining not recovered in that year shall be
deducted or recovered from rent in the subsequent years at the rate of not
more than twenty -five p er cent of the rent for a month :
Provided further that whe re there are more than one premises
owned by a landlord in a building, the tenants thereof may jointly carry out
the repairs and share the expenses proportionately.
(3) Nothing in sub -section (2) shall apply to a premises which, (a) at the time of letting out was not habitable or useable
except with undue inconvenience and the tenant had
agreed to take the same in that condition;
(b) after being let out was caused to be not habitable or
useable except with undue inconvenience by the
tenant.
18. (1) Every tenant shall be bound to keep the premises in good
and tenantable repairs in relation to the matters falling under Part B of
Schedule II to this Act.
(2) Where any repairs, in relation to a matter falling under Part
B of Schedule II to this Act without which the premises are not habitable
or us eable except with undue inconvenience, are to be made and the tenant
neglects or fails to make them within a period of sixty days after notice in
writing, the landlord may apply to the Rent Authority for permission to Duties of
tenant.

make such repairs himself and may submit to the Rent Authority an
estimate of the cost of such repairs, and, thereupon, the Rent Authority
may, after giving the tenant an opportunity of being heard and after
considering such estimate of the cost and making such enquiries as he may
consider necessary, by an order in writing, permit the landlord to make
such repairs at such cost as m ay be specified in the order, and it shall
thereafter be lawful for the landlord to make such repairs himself and to
recover the cost of such repairs, which shall in no case exceed the amount
so specified, from the tenant.
(3) The landlord or a person authorised by him shall have the
right to enter and inspect the premises after notice to the tenant in the Form
specified in Schedule VI to this Act.
(4) The tenant shall make good all damages caused to premises
by his negligence within ninety days of being informed in writing to do
so by the landlord failing which the landlord may apply to the Rent
Authority for permissi on to make good the said damages and the Rent
Authority shall decide the matter in the manner provided in sub -section
(2).
(5) The tenant shall hand over the possession of the premises on
termination of tenancy in the same condition, except for the normal wear
and tear, as it was when it was handed over to him at the beginning of such
tenancy and in a case where certain damages have been caused, not being
damages caused by war, act of God or disturbanc es, the tenant shall make
good the damages caused to the premises failing which the landlord may
apply to the Rent Authority for permission to make good the said damages
and the Rent Authority shall decide the matter in the manner provided in
sub-section ( 2).

(6) The tenant shall not, whether during the subsistence of
tenancy or thereafter, demolish any improvement or alteration, carried out
by him in the premises or remove any material used in such i mprovement
or alteration, other than any fixture of a removable nature, without the
permission of the landlord failing which such demolition or alteration shall
be deemed to be a damage caused by such tenant under sub -section (4) and
shall be dealt with ac cordingly.
19. (1) No landlord or tenant either by himself or through any
person purporting to act on his behalf shall, without just and sufficient
cause cut off or withhold any essential supply or service enjoyed by the
tenant or landlord, as the case may be, in respect of the premises let to him,
or, under his own occupation.
(2) If a landlord or a tenant contravenes the provisions of sub section (1), the tenant or the landlord, as the case may be, may make an
application to Rent Authority complaining of such contravention.
(3) If the Rent Authority is satisfied that the essential supply or
service was wilfully cut off or withheld, it may pass an order directing the
restoration of the amenities immediately pending the inquir y referred to in
sub-section (4):
Provided that interim order may be passed under this sub -section
without giving notice to the landlord or the tenant, as the case may be.
(4) If the Rent Authorit y on inquiry finds that the essential
supply or service enjoyed by the tenant or landlord was cut off or withheld
by the landlord or the tenant, as the case may be, wilfully and without just
and sufficient cause, he shall make an order directing the restor ation of
such supply or service. Cutting off or
withholding
essential supply
or service.

(5) The Rent Authority shall complete an enquiry under sub section (4) within a period of thirty days of filing of an application for
enquiry unless the Rent Authorit y, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
decides that it is not possible to complete the enquiry within such period.
(6) The Rent Authority may, in his discretion, direct that
compensation not exceeding one thousand rupees be paid to, -
(a) the landlord or the tenant, as the case may be, by the
complainant if the applica tion under sub -section (2)
was made frivolously or vexatiously;
(b) the complainant, if the landlord or the tenant, as the
case may be, had cut off or withheld the supply or
service without just and su fficient cause.
Explanation. - In this section the expression "essential supply or service"
shall include supply of water, electricity, lights in passages and on
staircases, conservancy and sanitary services.
Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, withholding any essential
supply or service shall include acts or commissions attributable to the
landlord or the tenant, as the case may be, on account of which the
essential supply or service is cut off by a local authority or any other
agency.
CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION OF TENANTS AGAINST EVICTION
20. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
other law or contract, no order or decree for the recovery of possession of Protection of
tenants against
eviction.

any premises shall be made by any court[***] or Rent Authority in favour
of the landlord against any tenant, save as prov ided in sub -section (2).
(2) The Rent Authority may, on an application made to it in the
form specified in Schedule XII to this Act make an order for the recovery
of possession of any premises on one or more of the following grounds
only, namely: -
(a) that the tenant has neither paid nor tendered the
whole of the arrears of the rent and other charges
payable for three or more consecutive months l egally
recoverable from him within two months of the date
on which a notice in the Form specified in Schedule
VII to this Act, of demand for the arrears of such rent
and other charges payable and interest at the rate of
fifteen per cent, for the period of default has been
served on him by the landlord in the manner provided
in section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 :
Provided that a tenant shall not be entitled to the benefit of
service of notice by the landlord under this clause where having obtained
such benefit once in respect of any premises, he again makes a default in
the payment of rent and other charges payable in respect of those premises;
(b) that the tenant has used the premises for a purpose
other than that for which they were let;
(c) that the premises were let for use as a residence and, (i) neither the tenant nor any member of his family
has been residing therein for a period of six
months;

Omitted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 4

Explanation. - For the purposes of this clause and clause (q), "family"
means parents, spouse, dependent sons and daughters or such other
relatives as are ordinarily living with the tenant and are dependent upon
him;
(d) that the premises or any part thereof have become
unsafe or unfit for human habitation and are required
by the landlord for carrying out repairs or
reconstruction which cannot be carried out wit hout the
premises being vacated :
Provided that no order for the recovery of possession under this
clause, clause (f), clause (g) and clause (h) shall be made unless the Rent
authority is satisfied that the plans and estimates of such repairs or re -
constructi on, as the case may be, have been properly prepared and that the
landlord has the necessary means to carry out the s aid repairs or re -
construction :
Provided further that if the landlord proposes to change the use of
the pre mises after re -construction, t han, he shall so specify in his
application for recovery of possession and, after such re -construction, the
landlord shall if it is otherwise permissible under law, utilize the built up
area equal to the previous area for the original use to the extent required for
the purpose of sub -section (i) of section 30 and the rest for any other use;
(e) that the premises or any part thereof are required by
the landlord for the purpose of immediate demolition
ordered by the Government or any local authority or
the premises are required by the landlord to carry out
any building work at the instance of the Government
or local authority in pursuance of any improvement

scheme or development scheme and that such bui lding
work cannot be carried out without the premises being
vacated;
(f) that the premises or any part thereof are required by
the landlord for carrying out any repairs which cannot
be carried out wit hout the premises being vacated;
(g) that the premises are required by the landlord for the
purpose of building or re -building or making thereto
any substantial addition or alteration including
constru ction on the terrace or on the appurtenant land
and that such building or re -building or addition or
alteration cannot be carried out without the premises
being vacated;
(h) that the premises consist of not more than two floors
and the same are required by the landlord for the
purpose of immediate demolition w ith a view to re build the same :
Provided that where the building of which such premise or
premises possession in respect of which has been recovered under clause
(d), clause (e), clause (f) or clause (g) forms a part has been re -built to an
extent of less than seventy -five per cent, a tenant so dispossessed shall
have a right to re -entry at the new terms of tenancy in a premises in the re built building equivalent in area to the original premises for which he was
a tenant;

(i) that the tenant, his spouse or a dependent son or
daughter or dinarily living with him has,[***] built or
acquired vacant possession of or been allotted a
residence on hire -purchase basis :
Provided that the Rent Au thority may in appropriate case
allow the tenant to vacate the premises within such period as he may
permit but not exceeding three months from the date of passing of orders
of eviction or one year from the date of getting possession of premises
referred to in sub - section (1) above.
(j) that the premises were let to the tenant for use as a
residence by reason s of his being in the service or
employment of the landlord, and that the tenant has
ceased,[***] to be in such service or employment :
Provided that no order for the recovery of possession of any
premises shall be made on this ground if the Rent Authority is of the
opinion that there is any bona fide dispute as to whether the tenant has
ceased to be in the service or employment of the landlord;
(k) that the tenant has , [***] caused or permitted to be
caused substantial damage to or such alteration of the
premises as has the effect of changing its identity or
diminishing its value.
Explanation. - For the purposes of this clause, "substantial damage" shall
mean such damage as shall involve an expenditure equivalent to six
months' rent or more, of the premises or such less expenditure as the Rent
Authority is satisfied, keeping in view, the special nature of damage,

1Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 10
2Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 10
3Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 10

justify the same to be treated as substantial damage for carrying out the
repairs for such damage:
Provided that no order for the recovery of possession of any
premises shall be made on the ground specified in this clause, if the tenant,
within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the Rent Authority,
carries out repairs to the damage caused to the satisfaction of the Rent
Authority or pays to the landlord such amount by way of compensation as
the Rent Authority ma y direct;
(l) that the tenant or any person residing with the tenant
has been convicted of causing nuisance or annoyance
to a person living in the neighbourhood of the
premises or has been convicted of using or allowing
the use of the premises for an immoral or illegal
purpose ;
(m) that the tenant has, used or dealt with the premises in
a manner contrary to any condition imposed on the
landlord by the Government, while giving him a lease
of the land on which the premises are situated :
Provided that no order for the recovery of possession of any
premises shall be made on this ground if the tenant, within such time, as
may be specified in this beha lf by the Rent Authority, complies with the
condition imposed on the landlord by any of the authority referred to in
this clause;
(n) that the tenant in his reply having denied the
ownership of landlor d has failed to prove it or that
such denial was not made in a bona fide manner;

(o) that the person in occupation of the premises has failed
to prove that he is a bona fide tenant;
(p) that the tenant after having agreed with or having
informed the landlord in writing the date to vacate the
premises does not do so on or after the date so agreed
or informed;
(q) that the premises let for residential or non -residential
purposes are required, whether in the same form or
after re -construction or re - building, by the landlord
for occupation for residential or non -residential
purpose for himself or for any member of his family if
he is the owner thereof, or for any person for whose
benefit the premises are held and that the landlord or
such person has no other reasonable suitable
accommodation :
Provided that where the landlord h as acquired the premises by
transfer no application for the recovery of possession of such premises
shall lie under this clause unless a period of three years has elapsed f rom
the date of the acquisition :
Provided further that where an order for the recovery of possession
of any premises is made on the ground specified in this clause, the landlord
shall be entitled to obtain possession thereof on the expiration of a period
of three months from the date of passing of eviction order.
Explanation I. - For the purposes of this clause, where the landlord
in his application supported by an affidavit submits that the premises are
required by him for occupation for himself or for any member of his family

dependent on him, the Rent Authority shall presume th at the premises are
so required.
Explanation II. - For the purposes of this clause of section 21,
part of a building of which any premises let out by him forms a part, shall
not dise ntitle him to recover the possession of such premises.
Explanation III. - For the purposes of this clause "owner of the
premises" includes a person who has been allotted such premises by the
Punjab Housing Development Board or any other local authority by way of
an agreement of hire -purchase, lease or sub -lease, even before the full
ownership rights accrue to such hire -purchaser, lessee or sub -lessee, as the
case may be.
(3) In any proceedings for eviction under clause (d), (e), (f), (g)
or (q) of sub -section (2) of this section or section 21 or section 22 or
a part of the premises if the landlord is agreeable to the same :
Provided that, in case of such part -eviction, the rent and other
charges payable by the tenant shall be decreased in proportion to the part
vacated.
(4) No order for the recovery of possession in any proceedings
under sub - section (2) shall be binding on any sub -tenant referred to in
the provisions of that section, unless the sub -tenant is made a party to the
proceedings and the order for eviction is made binding on him.
21. (1) Where a person in occupation of any residential premises
allotted to him by the Government or any local authority is required by, or Right to recover
immediate
possession of
premises to accrue
to certain persons.

in pursuance of, any general or special order made by that Government or
authority, to vacate such residential accommodatio n, or in default to incur
certain obligations, on the ground that he or his spouse or his dependent
son or daughter, as the case may be, owns, in the concerned local authority
residential accommodation, there shall accrue, on and from the date of
such orde r, to such person, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter as
the case may be, notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act
or in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract (whether
express or implied), custom or usage to the contrary, a right to recover
immediate possession of any premises let out by him, his spouse or his
dependent son or daughter, as the case may be :
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed as
conferring a right on such person, his spou se or his dependent son or
daughter, as the case may be, owning in the concerned local authority two
or more dwelling houses, to recover the possession of more than one
dwelling house and it shall be lawful for such person, his spouse or his
dependent son or daughter, as the case may be, to indicate the dwelling
house possession of which he intends to recover.
Explanation. - For the purpose of this sub -section, sections 22, 23
and 24 immediate possession shall mean possession recoverable on the
expiry of sixty days from the date of order of eviction.
(2) Where a landlord exercises the rights of recovery conferred
on him by sub -section (1) or sections 22 , 23 or 24 and he had received, -
(a) any advance from the tenant, he shall, on the date of
recovery of possession of the premises by him, r efund
to the tenant such amount :

Provided that, if any default is made in making any refund as
aforesaid the landlord shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of
fifteen per cent per annum on the amount which he has failed to refund:
Provided further that it shall be permissible for the landlord to set
off any amount which he is lawfully entitled to recover from tenant against
the refund due to the tenant.
22. (1) Where a person -
(a) is a released or retired person from any armed forces
and the premises let out by him, his spouse or his
dependent son or daughter, as the case may be, are
required for his own residential or non -residential
use;
(b) is a dependent or a member of any armed forces who
had been killed in action and the premises let out by
such member are required for th e residential or non residential use of the family of such member, such
person, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter,
as the case may be, may, within one year from the
date of his release or retirement from such armed
forces or, as the case may be, the date of death of
such member, or within a period of one year from the
date of commencement of this Act, whichever is
later, apply to the Rent Authority for recovery of
immediate possession of such premises.
(2) Where a person is a member of any of the armed forces and
has a period of less than one year preceding the date of his retirement and
the premises let out by him, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter, as Right to recover
immediate
possession of
premises to
accrue to
members of
armed forces.

the case may be, are require d for his own residential or non -residential use
after his retirement, he, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter, as the
case may be, may at any time within a period of one year before the date of
his retirement, apply to the Rent Authority for recov ery of immediate
possession of such premises.
(3) Where the person, his spouse or his dependent son or
daughter referred to in sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) has let out more
than one premises, it shall be open to him, his spouse or his dependent son
or daughter, as the case may be, to make an application under the said sub sections in respect of one premises, each for residential and non -residential
purposes.
23. (1) Where a person is a retired employee of the Central
Government or of a State Government and the premises let out by him, his
spouse or his dependent son or daughter are required for his own
residential or non -residential use, such employee, his spouse or his
dependent son or daughter, as the case may be, may w ithin one year from
the date of his retirement or within a period of one year from the date of
commencement of this Act, whichever is later, apply to the Rent Authority
for recovery of immediate possession of such premises.
(2) Where a person is an employee of the Central Government
or of a State Government and has a period of less than one year preceding
the date of his retirement and the premises let out by him or his spouse or
dependent son or daughter are required by him for his own residential or
non-residential use after his retirement, he, his spouse or his dependent son
or daughter, as the case may be, may at any time within a period of one
year before the date of retirement apply to the Re nt Authority for recovery
of immediate possession of such premises. Right to recover
immediate
possession of
premises to
accrue to Central
and State
Government
employees.

(3) Where the person, his spouse or his dependent son or
daughter referred to in sub -section (1) or in sub -section (2) has let out more
than one premises, it shall be open to him, his spouse or his dependent son
or daughter, as the ca se may be, to make an application under the said sub sections in respect of one premises for such residential and non - residential
purposes.
[24. (1) Where the landlord is, -
(a) a widow and the premises let out by her, or her
husband; or
(b) a handicapped person and the premises let out
by him or her; or
(c) a person who is of the age of sixty -five years or
more and the premises let out by him or her; or
(d) a freedom fighter, his widow or dependent son
or daughter and the premises let out by him or
her;
is required by him or her for his or her family or for any one ordinarily
living with him o r her for residential or non -residential use, he or she may
apply to the Rent Authority for recovery of immediate possession of such
premises.
(2) Where the landlord referred to in sub -section (1) has let out
more than one premises, it shall be open to him or her to make an
application under that sub -section in respect of any one residential and one
non-residential premises each chosen by him.

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 11 Right to recover
immediate
possession of
premises to accrue
to widows,
handicapped
persons, old
persons, freedom
fighters and non resident Indians.

Explanation I. - For the purposes of this section "han dicapped
person" shall mean a person who is, as being an assesse e, entitled for the
time being to the benefits of deduction under section 80U of the Income
Tax Act, 1961.
Explanation II. - The right to recover possession under this section
shall be exerc isable only once in respect of each for residential and for
non-residential use.
(3) Where an owner is a non -resident Indian and returns to India
for permanent residence, he or she may apply to the Rent Authority for
recovery of immediate possession of residential or/and non -residential
premises let out by him or her on or prior to the com mencement of this
Act, which are required for his or her use, or for the use of any one
ordinarily living with and dependent on him or her.
Explanation. - "non -resident Indian" means a person of Indian
origin, who is either permanently or temporarily set tled outside India, in
either case -
(i) for or on taking up employment outside India; or
(ii) for carrying on a business or vocation outsid e India; or
(iii) for any other purpose, in such circumstances, as
would indicate his intention to stay outside India for
an uncertain period. ]
25. (1) During the proceedings for recovery of possession under
at the rate at which these were being paid immediately before the
commencement of the proceeding. Payment of
rent during
eviction
proceedings .

(2) If,any proceeding for recovery of possession, there is any
dispute as to the amount of rent payable by the tenant, the Rent Authority
shall, within fifteen days of the date of the first hearing of the proceeding,
fix an interim rent and other charges in relation to the premises to be paid
or deposited within one month of the date on which the interim rent i s
fixed for such further time as the Rent Authority may allow in this behalf.
(3) If, in any proceeding for recovery of possession there is any
dispute as to the person or persons to whom the rent i s payable the Rent
Authority may direct the tenant to deposit with the Rent Authority the
amount payable by him under sub -section (2) as the case may be, and in
such a case, no person shall be entitled to withdraw the amount in deposit
until the Rent Autho rity decides the dispute and makes an order for
payment of the same.
(4) If the Rent Authority is satisfied that any dispute referred to
in sub - section (3) has been raised by a tenant for reasons wh ich are false
or frivolous, the Rent Authority may order the defence against eviction to
be struck out and proceed with the hearing of the application.
(5) If a tenant fails to make payment or deposit as required by
this section, the Rent Authority may order the defence against eviction to
be struck out and proceed with the hearing of the application.
[26. Without the previous consent, in writing, of the landlord, no tenant
shall , -
(a) sub-let the whole or any part of the premises held as a
tenant; or

Substituted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 12 Restrictions
on sub letting.

(b) transfer of assign his right in t he tenancy or any part
thereof. ]
27. Where after the commencement of this Act, any premises are sub let either in whole or in part by the tenant with the prior consent in writing
of the landlord the tenant or the sub -tenant to whom the premises are sub let may, in prescribed manner, give no tice to the landlord of the creation
of the sub -tenancy within one month of the date of such sub -letting and
also notify the termination of such sub -tenancy in the Form specified in
Schedule X to this Act.
28. Where an order for eviction in respect of any premises is made
under section 20 against a tenant but not against a sub -tenant referred to in
the sub -tenant shall, with effect from the date of the order, be deemed to
have become a tenant holding the premises in his occupation directly under
the landlord on the same terms and conditions on which the tenant would
have held from the landlord, if the tenancy had continued.
29. (1) Where a landlord recovers possession of any premises from
the tenant in pursuance of an order made under clause (q) of sub -section
(2) of section 20 or under sections 21, 22, 23, 24 or 31, the landlord shall
not, except with the permission of the Rent Authority obtained in the Form
specified in Schedule IX to this Act, re - let the whole or any part of the
premises within three years from the date of obtaining such possession,
and in granting such permission, the Rent Authority may direct the
landlord to put such evicted tenan t in possession of th e premises :
Provided that where a landlord recovers possession of any premises
from the tenant in pursuance of an order made under clause (q) of sub section (2) of section 20 for occupation after reconstruction or re building, Notice of
creation and
termination of
sub-tenancy.
Sub-tenant to
be tenant in
certain cases.
Recovery of
possession for
occupation
and re -entry.

the period of three years shall be reckoned from the date of completion of
re- construction or re -building, as the case may be.
(2) Where a landlord recovers possession of any premises as
aforesaid and the premises are not o ccupied by the landlord or by the
person for whose benefit the premises are held, within two months of
obtaining such possession, or the premises having been so occupied are, at
any time within three years from the date of obtaining possession, re -let to
any person other than the evicted tenant without obtaining the permission
of the Rent Authority under sub - section (1) or the possession of such
premises is transferred to another person for reasons which do not appear
to the Rent Authority to be bona fide, the Rent Authority may, on an
application in the form specified in Schedule XI to this Act, made to him in
this behalf by such evicted tenant, direct the landlord to put the tenant in
possession of the premises on the same terms and conditions if the
prem ises are in the same form or on new terms and conditions, if the
premises have been re -constructed or re -built.
30. (1) In making any order on the grounds specified in clause (d),
(e), (f), (g) and (h) of sub -section (2) of section 20 the Rent Authority shall
fix the new rent and ascertain from the tenant whether he e lects to be
placed in occupation of the premises or part thereof from which he is to be
evicted and if the tenant so elects, shall record the fact of the election in the
order and specify therein the date on or before which he shall deliver
possession so a s to enable the landlord to commence the work of repairs or
of building or re -building, as the case may be, and the date before which
the landlord shall deliver the possession of the said premises.
(2) If the tenant delivers possession on or before the date
specified in the order, the landlord shall, on the completion of the work of
repairs of building or re -building, place the tenant in occupation of the Recovery of
possession for
repair.

premises or part thereof before the date spe cified in sub -section (1) or such
extended date as may be specified by the Rent Authority by an order.
(3) If after, the tenant has delivered possession on or before the
date specified in the order, the landlord fails to commence the work of
repairs or building or re -building within three months of the specified date
the Rent Authority may, on an application made to him in this behalf by
the tenant, within subsequent three months, order the landlord t o place the
tenant in occupation of the premises on the same terms and conditions and
to pay to the tenant such compensation as the Rent Authority thinks fit.
(4) If the tenant has delivered possessi on on or before the date
specified in the order and the landlord fails to place the tenant in
occupation of the premises after repairs, building or re -building, as the case
may, in accordance with sub -section (2), the Rent Authority may, on an
application in the Form specified in Schedule XI to this Act made to him in
this behalf by the tenant within three months from the date of completion
of work, order the landlord to place the tenant in occupation of the
premises on revised terms and conditions and to p ay to the tenant such
compensation as the Rent Authority thinks fit.
31. (1) Where a landlord does not require the whole or any part of
any premises for a particular period, and after obtaining the permission of
the Rent Authority in the Form specified in Schedule XIV to this Act lets
the whole of the premises or part thereof as a residence for such period, not
being more than five years, as may be agreed to in writing between the
landlord and the tenant , and the tenant does not, on the expiry of the said
period vacate such premises, then, notwithstanding anything contained in
made to him in this behalf by the landlord within such time as may be
prescribed, place the landlord in vacant possession of the premises or part Recovery of
possession in
case of tenancies
for limited
period.

thereof by evicting the tenant and every other person who may be in
occupation of such premises.
(2) The Rent Authority shall not,
(i) grant permission under sub -section (1) in
relati on to a premises consecutively more than two
times except for good and sufficient reasons to be
recorded in writing.
Explanation. - The permission granted under sub -section (1) shall
not be construed to be consecutive, if a period of five years or more has
elapsed after the expiry of the last limited period tenancy ;
(ii) entertain any application from the tenant calling in
question the bona fides of the landlord in letting the
premises un der this section.
(3) All applications made before the Rent Authority and appeals
made before the [Appellate Authority] by the tenant shall abate on the
expiry of the period for which permission has been granted under sub section (1).
(4) While making an order under sub -section (1), the Rent
Authority may award to the landlord damages for the use or occupation of
the premises at double the last rent paid by the tenant together with interest
at the rate of fifteen per cent, per annum for the period from the date of
such order till the date of actual vacation by the tenant.
32. Where the landlord in respect of any premises is any company or
other body corporate or any public institution, then notwithstanding
anything contained in section 20 or in any other law, the Rent Authority

1Substituted for word “Tribunal” by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 5 Special provision
for recovery of
possession in
certain cases.

may, on an application made to him in this behalf by such landlord, place
the landlord in vacant possession of such premises by evicting the tenant
and every other person who may be in occupation thereof, if the R ent
Authority is satisfied that -
(a) the tenant to whom such premises were let for use as
a residence at a time when he was in the service or
employment of the landlord, has ceased to be in such
service or employment and the premises are required
for the use of employees of such landlord; or
(b) the tenant has acted in contravention of the terms,
express or implied, under which he was authorised to
occupy such premises; or
(c) any oth er person is in unauthorised occupation of
such premises;
(d) the premises are required bona fide by the landlord
for the use of employees of such landlord or, in the
case of a public institution, for the furtherance of its
activities.
Explanation. - For the purpose of this section, the expression
"public institution" includes any educational institution, library, hospital
and charitable dispensary but does not include any such institution set up
by a private trust.
33. (1) The landlord shall have the right to construct further storeys
on the r oof.
(2) In case the landlord wishes to reconstruct or renovate a
building which is more than twenty -five years old and for which he has Permission to
construct
additional
structure.

obtained the required sanction from the competent authority fo r
construction, the tenant shall temporarily vacate the building on being
served with three months' notice. In such a case the old tenant shall get the
first priority for occupation on revised rent as provided for in this Act. The
old tenant shall not be e ntitled for any other compensation whatsoever.
34. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 20, where any
premises which have been let comprise vacant land upon which it is
permissible under the building regulations or municipal bye -laws for the
time being in force, to erect any building, whether for use as a residence or
for any other purpose and the landlord proposing to erect such buil ding is
unable to obtain possession of the land from the tenant by agreement with
him and the Rent Authority, on an application made to him in this behalf
by the landlord, is satisfied that the landlord is ready and willing to
commence the work and that th e severance of the vacant land from the rest
of the premises will not cause undue hardship to the tenant, the Rent
Authority may -
(a) direct such severance;
(b) place the landlord in possession of the vacant land;
(c) determine the rent payable by the tenant in respect of
the rest of the premises; and
(d) make such other order as he thinks fit in the
circumstances of the case.
35. Notwithstanding anything contai ned in any other law, where the
interest of a tenant in any premises is determined for any reason
whatsoever and any order is made by the Rent Authority under this Act for
the recovery of possession of such premises, the order shall subject to the Special
provisions
regarding
vacant
building sites.
Vacant
possession to
landlord.

provisio ns of Section 28, be binding on all persons who may be in
occupation of the premises and vacant possession thereof shall be given to
the landlord by evicting all such persons therefrom.
CHAPTER V
RENT AUTHORITIES
36. [(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint as many Rent Authorities as it thinks fit and define the
limits within which each Rent Authority shall exercise the powers
conferred and perform the duties imposed upon it by or under this Act .]
(2) The [State Government ]may also, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint as many additional Rent Authorities as it thinks fit, and an
additional Rent Authority shall perform such of the functions of the Rent
Authority as may subject to the control of the [State Government ]be
assigned to him in writing by the Rent Authority and in the discharge of
these functions, an Additional Rent Authority shall have and shall exercise
the same powers and discharge the same duties as the Rent Authority.
[(3) ***]
37. (1) The Rent Authority may, -
(a) transfer any proceeding pending before him for
disposa l to any additional Rent Authority, or
(b) withdraw any proceeding pending before any
additional Rent Authority and dispose it of itself or
transfer the proceeding for disposal to any other
additional Rent Authority.

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 13
2Substituted for word “Government” by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 13
3Substituted for word “Government” by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 13
4Omitted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 6 Appointment of
Rent
Authorities and
Additional Rent
Authorities .
Power of Rent
Authority.

(2) The Rent Authority shall have the same powers as are vested
in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a
suit, in respect o f the following matters, na mely :-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of docu ments;
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed,
and any proceeding before the Rent Authority shall be deemed to
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section
228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code and the
Rent Authority shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purpose of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(3) For the purposes of holding any inquiry or discharging any
duty under th is Act, the Rent Authority m ay,-
(a) after giving not less than twenty -four hours'
notice in writing enter and inspect or authorise any
officer subordinate to him to enter and inspect any
premises at any time between sunrise and sunset; or
(b) by written order, require any person to produce
for his inspection all such accounts, books or other
documents relevant to the inquiry at such time and at
such place as may be specified in the order.

(4) The Rent Authority may, if he thinks fit, appoint one or
more persons having special knowledge of the matter under consideration
as an assessor or assessors to advise him on the proceeding before him.
(5) Any fine imposed by a Rent Authority under this Act shall
be paid by the person fined within such time as may be allowed by the
Rent Authority and the Rent Authority, for good and sufficient reason, may
extend the time, and in default of such payment, the amount shall be
recoverable as a fine under the provisions of the Code of Criminal
procedure, 1973, and the Rent Authority shall be deemed to be a
magistrat e under the said Code for the purposes of such recovery.
[(6) An order made by a Rent Authority under this Act, or an
order passed in appeal, shall be executable by a Rent Authority designated
by the Appellate Authority in this behalf and for this purp ose the Rent
Authority so designated shall have all the powers of a Civil Court .]
38. (1) No order which prejudicially affects any person shall be
made by the Rent Authority under this Act without giving him a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the order proposed to be
made and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may pro duce in
support of the same have been considered by the Rent Authority.
(2) Subject to any rule made under this Act and the other
provisions of this Act, the Rent Authority shall, while holding an in quiry in
any proceeding before him, follow as far as may be the practice and
procedure of a court of small causes, including the recording of evidence.
(3) The Rent Authority shall not ordinarily all ow more than
three adjournments at the request of a party throughout the proceedings

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 7 Procedure to be
followed by
Rent Authority.

and in case he decides to do so, he shall inform the chairman the reasons
therefor e and order to pay the other party the reasonable cost.
(4) The Rent Authority shall issue summons in relation to every
application under this Act in the form specified in Schedule III to this Act.
(5) The Rent Authority shall, in addition to, and simultaneously
with the issue of summons for service on the opposite party, also direct the
summons to be served by registered post, acknowledgement due, under
certificate of posting addressed to the opposite party or his agent
authorised to accept the service at the place where the opposite party or his
agent actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain, and shall also direct affixing of the same on the door of the
premi ses in dispute and gets a manadi in this behalf. This shall constitute
valid service of summons.
(6) (a) An application under section 19 for cutting off
essential services shall be dealt with in accordance with the procedure
specified in this sub - section.
(b) The Rent Authority shall commence the hearing of the
application within seven d ays of the filing thereof and shall dispose of the
same within thirty days of starting of such hearing, failing such
commencement of hearing of application within such time, the R ent
Authority shall inform the [Appellate Authority ]the reasons therefor e.
(7) (a) Every application by a landlord for the recovery of
possession of any premises on the ground specified in clause (d) or clause
(e) or c lause (g) of sub -section (2) of section 20 or under section 21, or
under section 22 or under section 23 or under section 24 or under section

1Substituted for words “Chairman of the Tribunal” by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 8

shall be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified in this
sub-section.
(b) The tenant on whom the summons is duly served in
accordance with sub - section (5) in the Form specified in Schedule III to
this Act shall not contest the prayer for eviction from the premises unless
he files an affidavit s tating the grounds on which he seeks to contest the
application for eviction and obtains leave from the Rent Authority as
hereinafter provided; and in default of his appearance in pursuance of the
summons or his obtaining such leave, the statement made by the landlord
in the application for eviction shall be deemed to be admitted by the tenant
and the applicant shall be entitled to an order for eviction on the ground
aforesaid.
(c) The Rent Authority shall give to the tenant leave to contest
the application if the affidavit filed by the tenant discloses such facts as
would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for the recovery of
possession of the premises.
(d) Where leave is granted to the tenant to contest the
application, the Rent Authority shall ordinarily commence the hearing of
the application within seven days of the grant of such leave and shall
provide day to day hearing and shall dispose of the application within
thirty days of starting of such hearing failing such commencement of
hearing or disposal of application within such time, the R ent Authority
shall inform the [Appellate Authority ]the reas ons therefor e.
(e) Where the leave to contest under clause (c) is denied to the
tenant he may file an application for review before the Rent Authority

1Substituted for words “Chairman of the Tribunal” by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 8

within ten days of such denial and the Rent Aut hority shall endeavour to
dispose of such application within seven days of its filing.
(8) Every application made to the Rent Authority shall be heard
as expeditiously as possible and, subject to the provisions of sub -section
(6) and (7), endeavour shall be made to conclude the hearing and to
dispose of the application within six months of its being filed.
(9) In all proceedings before him, the Rent Authority shall
consider the question of costs and award such costs to or against any party
as the Rent Authority considers reasonable.
(10) When the ejectment decree is passed under this A ct, the Rent
Authority shall in addition pass order for recovery of arrears of rent and
other charges along with interest at the rate of fifteen per cent per annum,
recoverable as arrears of Land Revenue.
38. (A) Every application to the Rent Authority shall be in such
Forms as provided in the relevant Schedule to this Act alongwith relevant
documents and other required evidence, fees for various applications and
processes shall be the same as applicable to a Rent Contro ller under the
CHAPTER VI
[APPELLATE AUTHORITY]
[39 to 49 **** ]

1Substituted for words “Punjab Rent Tribunal” by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 9
2Omitted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 10 Application to
Rent Authority.

[50. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the State
Government may, by a general or special order, by notification confer on
such officers and authorities, as it may think fit, the powers of Appellate
Authority in relation to, -
(a) all appeals against the orders of the Rent Authority
under this Act ;
(b) any other matter, except the registration of agreements
referred to in sub -section (2) of section 4 of this Act,
arising from the provisions of this Act; and
(c) review of its own orders and decisions.
(2) The Appellate Authority may, either suo moto or on
application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties and after
hearing such of them as it may desire to be heard, call for records of any
case pending before the Rent Authority under this Act, and either itself try
the case or give dire ction for disposal of the case to such Rent Authority.
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order passed or a decision made
by a Rent Authority may, within thirty days from the date of such order or
decisi on, prefer an appeal, in writing, to the Appellate Authority in the
prescribed form and accompanied by certified copy of the ord er or decision
appealed against :
Provided that an appeal may be entertained after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days , if the appellant satisfies the Appellate Authority
that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the
specified period.

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 11 Jurisdiction,
powers and
authority of the
Appellate
Authority.

(4) In computing the aforesaid period of thirty days, the time
taken in obtaining certified copy of the order or decision to be appealed
against shall be excluded.
(5) An appeal shall lie to the Appellate Authority from every
order or decision of Rent Authority made under this Act bo th on question
of law and facts :
Provided that no appeal shall lie against an order or decision of the
Rent Authority made under section 21 or section 33 of this Act.
(6) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section (3), the Appellate
Authority shall, if satisfied, after such inquiry as it may deem necessary
that the appeal is a fit case for adjudication by it, entertain such appeal, but
if the Appellate Authority is not so satisfied, it may summarily reject the
appeal after recording its reason.
(7) The Appellate Authority shall endeavour to dispose of an
appeal against the order or decision of the Rent Authority under clause (d),
clause (e), or clause (q) of sub -section (2) of section 20 of sections 21, 22,
23, 24 or 31 within one month of filing of such appeal.
(8) The Appellate Authority shall have the po wer to effect
conciliation between the parties in any case pending before it.]
[51. ***]
[52. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person,
aggrieved by any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of
the Appellate Authority, may make an application to the Appellate

1Omitted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 1 2
2Substituted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 13 Application to
the Appellate
Authority.

Authority in the form specified in Schedule XIII appended to this Act for
the redressal of his grievance.
(2) Every application under sub -section (1) shall be in such form
and be accompanied by such affidavits, documents or any other evidence
and by such fees in respect of the filing of such applications and by such
other fees for the service or execution of processes under the provisions of
to time.
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section (1), the
Appellate Authority shall, if satisfied after such inquiry as it may deem
necessary that the application is a fit case for adjudication or tria l by it,
entertain such application but where the Appellate Authority is not so
satisfied, it may summarily reject the applicati on after recording its
reasons. ]
[53. ***]
[54. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this
Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order
(whether by way of injunction or stay) shall be made on, or i n any
proceeding relating to, an application or appeal unless, -
(a) copies of such application or appeal and of all
documents in support of the plea for such interim order
are furnished to the party ag ainst whom such
application is made or appeal is preferred; and
(b) an opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the
matter :

1Omitted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 1 4
2Substituted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 1 5 Conditions as to
making of
Interim order.

Provided that the Appellate Authority may dispense with the
requirements of clauses (a) and (b) and make an interim order as an
exceptional measure, if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded, in writing,
that it is necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the
applicant or the appellant, as th e case may be, which cannot be adequately
compensated in money, but any such interim order shall, if it is not sooner
vacated, cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fourteen days
from the date on which it is made unless the said requirements ha ve been
complied with before the expiry of that period or the Appellate Authority
has continued the operation of the interim order. ]
[55. A person makin g an application or preferring an appeal to the
Appellate Authority under this Act may either appear in person or take the
assistance of a legal practitioner of his choice to present his case before the
Appellate Authority. ]
[56 to 59 ***]
[60. ***]
[61 to 64 *****]
65. Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order passed by the
[Appellate Authority] or Rent Authority or errors arising therein from any
accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the
[Appellate Authority] or, as the case may be, the Rent Authority on an
application received in this behalf from any of the parties or otherwise.

1Substitut ed by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 1 5
2Omitted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 1 6
3Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 20
4Omitted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 1 6
5Substituted for word “Tribunal” by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 17 Appearance
before the
Appellate
Authority.
Amendment
of orders.

66. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order made
by the Rent Authority or an order passed on appeal under this Act shall be
final and shall not be called in question, in any original suit, application or
execution proceeding.
CHAPTER VII
PENALTIES
67. [(1) ***]
(2) If any landlord or tenant contravenes the provisions of
subsection (1) of section 19, he shall be punishable with fine equivalent
in amount to the rent for three months or with one month's imprisonment
or with both, and shall also be liable to fine of [five hundred rupees] for
each day commencing on the date of cutting off or withholding essential
supply or service till the date the essential supply or service is restored.
(3) If any tenant sublets, assigns or otherwise parts with the
possession of the whole or part of any premises in contravention of the
provisions of section 26, he shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to [ten thousand rupees] , or double the rent received by the tenant
for sub -letting for every month till such time the cause of complaint ceases,
whichever is more or with imprisonment for a term of one month.
(4) If any landlord makes a false statement in his affida vit under
Explanation I to clause (q) of sub -section (2) of section 20, he shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to [ten thousand rupees] , or
double the rent receivable for a period of three years in case it has been re let, whichever is more.

Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 21
2Substituted for words 'one hundred rupees' by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013 , Section 21
3Substituted for words 'five thousand rupees' by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013 , Section 21
4Substituted for wor ds 'five thousand rupees' by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013 , Section 21 Finality of
Orders .
Penalties.

(5) If any landlord re -lets or transfers the whole or any part of
any premises in contravention of sub -section (1) of section 29, he shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to [ten thousand rupees] , or
double the rent the landlord receives after re -letting whichever is more, or
imprisonment which may extend to one month.
Explanation - For the purposes of this sub -section and sub - section
(3), in cases where it is difficult to prove the rent which the landlord or the
tenant, as the case may be, is receiving after re -letting or sub -letting, the
fine may extend to five thousand rupees.
(6) If, after the tenant has delivered possession, the landlord fails
to commence the work of repairs of building or re -building, as the case
may be, within three months of the specified date under s ub-section (3) of
months.
(7) If a landlord contravenes the provisions of sub -section (2) of
months' rent of the premises.
(8) If a tenant fails to make re -entry under sub -section (2) of
or building or re -building, as the case may be, intimated in writing by the
landlord, without reasonable excuse, he shall forfeit his right to re -entry
and shall be punishable with fine equivalent to three months' rent of the
premises.

1Substituted for words 'five thousand rupees' by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013 , Section 21

CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS

68. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no civil court
shall entertain any suit or proceedings insofar as it relates to any other
matter to which this Act applies or to any other matter which the Rent
Authority is empowered by or under this Act to decide and no injunction in
respect of any action taken or to be taken by the Rent Authority or the
[Appellate Authority ] under this Act shall be granted by any civil court or
other authority.
69. All Rent Au thorities and Additional Rent Authorities appointed
under this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of
70. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any
Rent Authority or Additional Rent Authority in respect of anything which
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuanc e of this Act.
[71 &72. ****]
73. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
may appear to be necess ary for removing the difficulty :
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section, shall as soon as may
be, after it is made, be laid before the Vidhan Sabha.

1Substituted for word “Tribunal” by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 1 8
2Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 22 Jurisdiction of
civil courts
barred in
respect of
certain matters.
Rent Authorities
to be public
servants.

Protection of
action taken in
good faith.

Power of
Government to
remove
difficulties.

74. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette make Rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before the Vidhan Sabha, while it is in session for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid, the
House agrees in making any mo dification in the rule or agrees that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect as the case may be, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the va lidity
of anything previously done under that rule.
[75. (1) On the commencement of this Act, the East Punjab Urban
Rent Restriction Act, 1949 ( East Punjab Act No. III of 1949), is hereby
repealed:
Provided that such repeal shall not affect, -
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or
anything duly done or suffered thereunder;
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired,
accrued or incurred under the Act so repealed;
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in
respect of any offence committed under the Act so
repealed; and
(d) any investigation , legal proceeding or remedy in
respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability
penalty, forfeiture,

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 23 Power of
Government to
frame rules.
Repeal and
Savings.

and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may
be imposed as if the repealing Act had not been passed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the East Punjab Urban Rent
Restriction Act, 1949 (East Punjab Act No. III of 1949), under sub -section
(1), all cases and other proceedings in respect of the premises, ot her than
owned by a non -resident Indian, let out prior to the commencement of this
Act shall be governed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
the Act so repealed .]

[SCHEDULE I
(see section 4)
Form of Agreement
(to be typed on Bond Paper in three copies, on each for the Landlord, the
Tenant and the [Registering Authority ]).
AGREEMENT
This agreement is made between _______________Owner/ Authorised
Attorney/Landlord of _________and__________ lessee (tenant)
on___ ______ day of__________ (month and year) for letting out of
premises on the following terms and conditions, namely: -
(i) The tenancy will be for a period of________ months/years.
(ii) The Starting rent will be Rs. _______ per months.
(iii) The maintenance charges at Rs, ________ per month will
also be paid along with rent.
(iv) The property tax will be paid by the tenant.
(v) The day to day repairs (Part ‘B’) of Schedule -II will be the
responsibility of the tenant.
(vi) The repairs to damages in part ‘A’ of Schedule -II will be
carried out by the landlord unless caused by the negligence
of the tenant.
(vii) The rent and other payable charges will be paid by ________
day of, month in advance/the following months.
(viii) The tenant will have the option to vacate the premises by
giving three months not ice.
(ix) The rent will be increased by five per cent per year on
________ and ________ the third increase will be

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 24
2Substituted for words “Rent Authority” by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 19

proportionate to the increase in whole sale Consumer Price
Index over the three years period _______ to _____ [Sec. 6].
(x) The tenant agrees to hando ver the vacant possession of the
premises on the expiry of the period contracted, i.e. on
_______ day of ________ month_________ year_______.
(xi) The electricity and water bills will be paid by the tenant.
(xii) Both the landlord and the tenant agree to abide by the
conditions of the Punjab Rent Act, 1995.

Tenant Landlord

REGISTRATION
This agreement is presented for registration before me in the office of the
[Registering Authority] by _______ Landlord and ________ Tenant jointly on
day of _________ Year at _________.
The contents of the this deed have been read over and explained to the
executants, who admit the execution of this agreement to be corrected as agreed
to.
The agreement has been registered in this office at Sr. No.__________ at
pages ________ and Book No. ___________.

Dated: [Registering Authority]]

1Substituted for words “Rent Authority” by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 19
2Substituted for words “Rent Authority” by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 19

SCHEDULE II
(See sections 17 and 18)
Repairs & Responsibility
Part-A Structural repairs to be got done by the landlord.
1. Structural repairs, except those necessitated by damage caused by the
tenant.
2. Whitewashing of walls and painting of doors and windows once in
three years.
3. Changing and plumbing pipes when necessary.
4. Internal and external wiring and related maintenance.
Part-B Day to day repairs to be got done by the tenant.
1. Changing of tap washers and taps.
2. Drain cleaning.
3. Water closet repairs.
4. Wash basin repairs.
5. Bath tub repairs.
6. Geyser repairs.
7. Circuit breakers repairs.
8. Switches and Sockets repairs.
9. Repairs and replacement of electrical equipment, except major
internal and external wiring changes.
10. Kitchen fixtures repairs.
11. Replacement of knobs and locks of doors , cub -boards, windows,
etc.
12. Replacement of flynets.
13. Replacement of glass panels in windows, doors, etc.
14. Maintenance of gardens and open spaces let -out to the tenant
15. Removal of plant growth from roof and walls.

SCHEDULE III
[See sub -section (4) of section 38]
Form of Summons
(Name, description and place of residence of the tenant)
Whereas Shri……………………………. has filed an application (a copy
annexed) …………………. on the grounds specified in section…………
You are hereby summoned to appear before the Rent Aut hority within ()
days of the service hereof and file a reply within………. day in default whereof
the matter shall be heard and disposed of ex parte .
You are to obtain the leave of the Rent Authority to contest the
application for eviction on the ground…………… . in default whereof the
applicant will be entitled at any time after the expiry of the said period of fifteen
days to obtain an order for your eviction from the said premises.
Leave to appear and contest the application may be obtained on an
application to the Rent Authority supported by an affidavit as is referred to in
clause (b) of sub -section (7) of section 38.
Given under my hand and seal of the Rent Authority or additional Rent
Authority.
This………………. day of ……………………... 20

(Seal) Rent Authority/
Additional Rent Authority.
To be filled in
Strike off portion not applicable
Notes: -
For cases covered under clauses (d) and (e) of sub -section (2) of section 20 and,
sections 21, 22, 23, 24 and 31 indicate fifteen days and for other cases indicate
thirty days.
For only cases covered under clause (a) of sub -section (8) of section 38.

[SCHEDULE IV ]

SCHEDULE V
[See sub -section (1) of Section 10]
Form of notice for Enhancement of rent
From
To
Notice for enhancement of rentfor improvements, under section 10 of the
Punjab Rent Act, 1995.
Whereas I have incurred expenses on additi ons/improvements/structural
alterations in the premises with/without your approval, befo re/after the
commencement of the Punjab Rent Act, 1995, which is not an expenditure on
decoration or tenantable repairs and which expenditure has not been taken into
account for determining the rent of premises.
As such I in exercise of the right given un der section 9 of the Act,
increase the rent to the extent of Rs.____________________________per year,
which does not exceed ten per cent of the expenditure.
Given under my hand on
______________(date)

Place : Signature
Date : Landlord/Authorised Representative.

1Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 25

SCHEDULE VI
[See sub -section (3) of section 18]
Form of notice for inspection
From
To
Notice for inspection of tenanted premises under section 18 of the Punjab
Rent Act, 1995.
Take notice that I intend to inspect the tenanted premises
on______________ (date) at_____________________(time) hrs.
Please keep yourself or your representative available and the premises
open for inspection.SignatureLandlord/Authorised representative.
Place : Signature
Date : Landlord/Authorised representative.

SCHEDULE VII
[See sub -section (2)(a) of section 20]
Form of Notice for payment of arrears
From
To
Notice for payment of arrears for rent and other charges under the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882, Section 106 read with section 20 of the
Punjab Rent Act, 1995.
Take notice that you are in occupation of
premises________________________ against monthly rent of
Rs._________________________ per month and other charges payable in
advance/by______________________(date).
That you have not paid legally recoverable rent and other charges for the
period_________________to_______________________
Your are hereby required through this notice to pay the rent and other
charges up to the dat e of payment along with interest at the rate of fifteen per
cent per annum within two months from the date of receipt of this notice, failing
which your tenancy will be deemed to have been determined (terminated) on the
expiry of the last day of the month of tenancy following sixty days from the
date of receipt of this notice.
Given this______________________day under my own
signature/authorised representative.
Place : Signature
Date : Landlord/Authorised representative.

[SCHEDULE VIII]

1Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 2 6

SCHEDULE IX
Form of application for re -letting under section 29
In the Court of Rent Authority_______________________________
I am the owner of premises______________________________________
I had got these premises vacated from________________________the tenant
on______________________________for my personal use/use of my
dependent.
I do not need the premises due t o the circumstances given below :-
.................................................
.................................................
I request that I may be granted permission to let it out in full/part as enumerated
hereunder.
.................................................
.................................................
Date Applicant
Verification
It is hereby certified that the premises are located within the Municipal
limits of__________________________which is under the territorial
jurisdiction of this Rent Authority. The contents of this application are true to
the best of my knowledge and belief.
Date Applicant/Authoris ed Attorney.

SCHEDULE X
Form of notice under section 27
From
Sub-tenant
To
Landlord
This is to inform you that I have been inducted as sub -tenant in premises
_____________________________(completeAddress)_______________with
your prior permission by_____________(tenant) (Name and address of person
inducting)______________________.
The tenancy is for a period commencing from____________________ at
a rent of Rs. _ _________per month. The period of tenancy
is_________years/months.
The sub -tenancy wi ll come to an end on___________________________
Photo -copy of your concurrence is enclosed.
Dated : Signature of sub -tenant .

SCHEDULE XI
Form of application for re -entry under sub -section (2) of section 29 and sub section (4) of section 30 .
In the court of Rent Authority_______________________________
I___________________________________________________was the
tenant in the premises________________________________.
I was evicted from the premises for the purpose of :-
* (i) Family/Self -use of the premises by the owner.
* (ii) For repairs/re -building of the premises by the landlord .
I handed over the possession of the said premises to the landlord
on_______.
* The landlord has not occupied the premises so far/has not started the
work of repairs/re -building till date.
I request that the landlord may be directed to allow me to occupy the
premises, in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Rent Act, 1995.

Date : Applicant .
Verification :
It is hereby certified th at the premises are located within the Municipal
limits of________________________which is under the territorial jurisdiction
of this Rent Authority. The contents of this application are true to the best of my
knowledge and belief.
Dated : Appl icant/Au thorisedAttorney.
*Strike out whichever is not applicable.

SCHEDULE XII
Form of application for Eviction under sub -section (2) of section 20.
In the Court of the Rent Authority ___________________________
__________________________ Petitioner
Versus
__________________________ Respondent

Application under section 20 of the Punjab Rent Act, 1995 for eviction of
Respondent and_________________from________________ bounded as
under: -
North_____________________________
South____________________________
East______________________________
West_____________________________
Sir,
The petitione r respectfully submits as under :-
The respondent is a tenant under petitioner in the premises mentioned
above at Rs._______________________per month to be paid
by_______________ day of the month in advance.
The respondent has become liable to eviction fr om the premises for the
reasons :-
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
It is prayed that the application of petitioner be allowed, the respondent
be ordered to be evicted and put the petitioner in vacant possession of the said
premises.
Dated : Applicant/Petitioner.

Verification
It is certified that the premises is situated in the Municipal limits of
____________________ which fal ls within the territorial jurisdiction of this
Rent Authority.
That the contents of paras 1 to_______________________are correct to
the best of my knowledge and belief.
Dated : Submitted by.

SCHEDULE XIII
[Form of application for appeal to the Appell ate Authority under section 52. ]
Appellant
Vs.
Respondent
Appeal against the order of Rent
Authority______________________________
dated____________________Allowing________________________________
The Applican t respectfully submits as under :-
(1) That the appeal is being submitted within the limitation.
Order was passed on____________________________________
Application for obtaining copy was submitted on_________________________
the same was prepared on________________________________________
(2)The court was closed on_____________________________________
*The appeal could not be fi led within the prescribed time.
Application for condoning delay for sufficient cause is enclosed.
The orders of the Rent Authority are liable to be set a side on the fo llowing
grounds: -
__________________________
__________________________
It is, therefore prayed that:
(i) Records of the case be called for.
(ii) Appeal be allowed and order of the Rent Authority be set aside.

Dated : Submitted by.
*Strike out if not necessary

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 23 of 2014, Section 20

SCHEDULE XIV
Form of application for permission for limited period tenancy under section 31.
In the court of the Rent
Authority_________________________________
Application under section 31 of the Punjab Rent Act, 1995.
Sir,
The applican t submits as under :-
(i) That I am the owner of premises____________________________
(ii) I will not need the abovesaid premises for my own occupation due
to:-
(a)
(b)
(c)
I request that I may be granted permission to rent out the premises
for a period of__________________________years.
I have availed/not availed permission under the said section with
respect to the premises in question.
Date : Applicant
Verification
It is certified that the above premises are situated in the Municipal limits
of ___________which is under the territorial jurisdiction of this Rent Authority.
The contents of this application are true to the best of my knowledge and belief.

Date: Applicant

[SCHEDULE XV]

1Omitted by Punjab Act No. 33 of 2013, Section 27