An Act to provide for the constitution of a Corporatio n for establishing,
expanding, i mproving and administering medical care in the State of Punjab.
BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Forty -seventh
Year of the Republic of India as follows: -
1. (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Health Systems Corporation Act,
1996.
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Punjab.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

, Page 372. Short title, extent
and
commencement.
Definitions.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a) "Board of Directors" means the Board of Directors constitu ted under
(b) "Chairman" means the Chairm an of the Corporation;
(c) "Corporation" means the Punjab Health Systems Corporation
constituted under section 3 of this Act;
(d) "Expert" means a person who holds a post graduate degree, and has a
working experience of at least ten years in the line and has held
responsible positions in the Government or private sector;
(e) "Government" means the Government of the State of Punjab;
(f) "Managing Director" means the Managing Director of the Corporation
appointed under section 5 of this Act.
(g) "Professiona l" means a person who has at least ten years' experience
in Telecommunication or Systems Management;
(h) "Regulations" means the regulations made by the Corporation;
(i) "Specialist" means a medical practitioner with post -graduate
qualification in any of the disciplines relating to medical sciences;
(j) "Super Specialist" means a medical practitioner with any higher
qualification than a post -graduate qualification in any of the
disciplines relating t o medical sciences e.g. speciali sation in heart
surgery, neuro-surgery and cancer cure, etc . and;
[(k) “Vice -Chairman” means the Vice -Chairman of the Corporation.]

1Added by Punjab Act No. 14 of 2004, Section 2

CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF CORPORATION
3. (1) As soon as may be, after the commencement of this Act, the
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Corporation
for the State of Punjab to be called the "P unjab Health Systems Corporation ."
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act
and the regulations made thereunder, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, and
to enter into contracts, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The Corporation shall consist of, -
[(a) The Chairman of the Corporation , who shall be an eminent
public person or a distinguished and eminent medical person;
(aa) The Vice -Chairman of the Corporation, who shall be the
Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Health and
Family Welfare;]
[(aaa) another Vice -Chairman, who may be appointed as such from
amongst the members of the Board of Directors;]
(b) the Managing Director, who shall be an officer of the India
Administrative Service;
(c) a Board of Directors; and
(d) such other employees, as may be determined by the Board of
Directors.

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 14 of 2004, Section 3
2Inserted by Punjab Act No. 36 of 2011, Section 2 Constitution of the
Corporation.
(4) The salary and other terms and conditions of the Service of the
Managing Director and those of the other employees of the Corporation shall be
such, as may be specified by regulations.
4. The functions of the Corporation shall be as follows, namely: -
(a) to formulate and implemen t the schemes for the comprehen sive
development of the dispensaries and hospitals;
(b) to construct and maintain dispensaries and hospitals and maintenance
of cleanliness therein;
(c) to implement National Hea lth Programmes as per the direc tions of the
State. The State Government and Central Government shall make
available funds for this purpose,
(d) to purchase, maintain and allocate quality equ ipment to various
dispensaries and hospitals;
(e) to procure, stock and distribute drugs, diet, linen and other
consumables among the dispensaries and hospitals;
(f) to provide services of specialists and super -specialists in various
hospitals;
(g) to enter into collaboration for super specialities with health
institutions both within the country or abroad to provide better
medical care;
(h) to receive donations, funds and the like from the gene ral public and
institutions from both within and outside In dia:
(i) to receive grants or contributions which may be made by the
Government on such conditions as it may impose; Functions of
the
Corporation.

(j) to provide for construction of houses to the employees of the
dispensaries and hospitals, and the maintenance thereof by mobilising
resources for financing institutions;
(k) to plan, construct and maintain commercial complexes, paying wards
and providing diagnostic services and treatment on payment basis and
to utilise the receipts for the improvement of the hospitals and
dispensaries;
(l) to run public utility service and undertake any other activity of
commerc ial nature for the delivery of h ealth care within or without the
hospital premises directly or in collaboration with private or voluntary
agency on contract basis;
(m) to engage spe cialised agencies or individuals in the relevant
disciplines, directly or from external sources for the efficient and
expeditious conduct of any of the functions detailed above; and
(n) to provide immediate treatment in case of emergency and for un accompanied patients.
5. (1) The Managing Director shall be the Executive Officer of the
Corporation and he shall implement the decisions of the Board of Directors and
shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions, as may be
delegated to him from time to time by the Board of Directors.
(2) The Managing Director shall exercise general control and supervision
over the dispensaries and hospitals in the effective performance of thei r functions
under this Act or the regulations made thereunder.
6. There shall be a Board of Directors consisting of the following members,
namely: - Managing
Director.
Constitution of
Board of
Directors.
[(a) the Chairman of the Corporation , who shall be an eminent
public person or a distinguished and eminent medical person;
(aa) the Vice -Chairman of the Corporation, who shall be the
Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Health and
Family Welfare;]
[(aaa) another Vice -Chairman, who may be appointed as such from
amongst the members of the Board of D irectors;]
(b) the Managing Director;
(c) the Secretary to the Government of Punjab in the Department of
Finance;
(d) the Secretary to the Government of Punjab in the Department of
Rural Development and Panchayats;
(e) the Secretary to the Government of Punjab in the Department of
Local Government;
(f) a representative of the Government of India in the Ministry of
Health;
(g) the Director of Health Services, Punjab ; and
(h) [eight eminent persons ] as given below, nominated by the
Government for a period of three years:
Provided that no nominee shall be a member of the Board of Directors
for more than two terms or six years whichever is less;
(i) a representative of a Medical Institution of excellence in the
country;

1Substituted by Punjab Act No. 14 of 2004, Section 4
2Inserted by Punjab Act No. 36 of 2011, Section 3
3Substituted for words “six eminent persons” by Punjab Act No. 36 of 2011, Section 3
(ii) two distinguished experts in professions related to Medicine
and Health;
(iii) an experienced professional in Systems Management or
Telecommunications;
(iv) the Director of the National Institute of Pharmaceutical
Education and Research;
(v) a representative of a reputed industrial house manufacturing
pharmaceutical s; and
[(vi) two eminent persons.]
7. (1) The Board of Directors shall hold meetings at such intervals, as may
be specified in the regulations ; a meeting may be convened by the Managing
Director at any time for the transaction of any urgent business.
(2) The number of members necessary to constitute a quorum at a meeting
and the procedure to be followed therea t shall be such, as may be provided in the
regulations.
8. (1) The Board of Directors shall be the principal policy formulating body
of the Corporation and shall have the following powers, namely: -
(a) to make regulations for fulfilling the objectives of this Act ;
(b) to make decisions for mobilising and borrowing money for
carrying out the activities of the Corporation;
(c) to promote research and dissemination of knowledge in medical
science in collaboration with kindred institutions;

1Added by Punjab Act No. 36 of 2011, Section 3 Meeting of the
Board of
Directors.
Power of the
Board of
Directors.
(d) to have linkages or agreements with specialized institutions or
agencies both within the country and outside for imparting
training to its personnel;
(e) to consider and take such action, as may be deemed fit on the
basis of the annual report, the annual accounts and the financial
estimates of the c orporation;
(f) to enter into agreements with the Central or any State
Govern ment or with a private entity for assuming management
of any dispensary or hospital and for taking over its assets and
liabilities or for any o ther purpose of this Act;
(g) to decide and regulate all matters concerning the regulations of
this Act;
(h) to exercise such other powers and perform such other functions,
as may be conferred or enjoined upon it by this Act or the
regulations made thereun der;
(i) to appoint persons to the various posts of the dispensaries and
hospitals and to fix their emoluments, define their duties and
terms and conditions of service and to provide for filling up of
vacancies;
(j) to hold, control and administer the properties of the
Corporation;
(k) to direct the form, custody and use of the common seal of the
Corporation;
(1) to administer the funds placed at the disposal of the Corporation
for specific purpose;
(m) to accept on behalf of the Corporation endowments, bequests,
donations, grants and transfer of any movable and immovable
properties made to it;
(n) to raise on behalf of the Co rporation loans from the Central or
any other State Government or the public;
(o) to levy and collect such fees, as may be specifi ed by regulations
for various services rendered;
(p) to purchase, stock, manufacture and distribute drugs, linen and
other consumables among the dispensaries and hospitals;
(q) to construct and maintain dispensaries and hospitals;
(r) to purchase, maintain and allocate quality equipment to various
dispensaries and hospitals ;
(s) to provide the services of specialists, super specialists at various
hospitals;
(t) to provide housing facilities to the employees of the
dispensaries and hospitals, as may be specified by regulations;
and
(u) to exercise such other powers and perform su ch other functions,
as may be conferred or enjoined u pon it by this Act or the
regulations made thereunder .
(2) The Board of Directors may, by an order in writing delegate all or any
of its powers to the Managing Direct or or to any other office r of the Corporation
for the effective fu lfilment of its objectives .
9. The Board of Directors may, in such manner, as may be specified by
regulations constitute co mmittees of professional experts in respect of such Committee of
Professional
experts.
dispensaries and hospitals as it may consider necessary and when required with a
view to bring about qualitative improvements of the medical care facilities which
shall function u nder the administrative control of the Corporation.

CHAPTER III
FINANCE AND FUNDS OF THE CORPORATION

10. For the purpose of this Act, the Corporation ma y, -
(a) levy fees, or other charges from such persons or class of persons
making use of the services available in the dispensaries or hospitals in
accordance with such regulations, as may be made ;
(b) defray operating expenses, and ensure better upkeep and hygienic
conditions and sustained improvement of the dispensaries or
hospitals;
(c) continuously update equipment and modernise the services so as to
keep pace with the advancement in the medical care facilities to the
public and to provide upto date facilities to the public;
(d) effect repayment of loans and other borrowings; and
(e) provide for such other purposes, beneficial to the promotion of
medical care, as the Corporation may determine.
11. (1) The Corporation shall have its own fund consisting of ,-
(a) the grants from the Govern ment voted by the State Legislature
which shall not be less than the present annual expenditur es of
the State Government on salaries/medicines, equipment and
maintenance of the medical institutions specified in t he
Schedule appended to this Act and grants received from t he
Central Government; Levy of fee by
the Corporation.
Funds of the
Corporation.
(b) loans or grants from the World Bank of other International
Financial Institutions or Agencies on such terms and con ditions,
as may be stipulated and agreed upon ;
(c) loans from financial institution s as well as from other medical
institution who might be prepared to collaborate with the
Corporation;
(d) all moneys received by or on behalf of the Corporation from
public bodies, private bodies or private individuals by way of
contributions, grants, gif ts or deposits;
(e) all moneys received by or on behalf of the Corporation under
the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in
force, or under any contract;
(f) all proceeds of the disposals of the property by or on behalf of
the Corpor ation;
(g) all rents accruing from any property of the Corporation; and
(h) all interests and profits arising from any investment of or from
any transaction in c onnection with any money belong ing to the
Corporation.
(2) All moneys belonging to the fund shall be invested in such manner, as
the Board of Directors may decide.
(3) The Corporation may spend such sums as may be deemed fit for
performing its functions under this Act and such sums shall be treated as
expenditure payable out of the fund.

12. With effect from such date, a s may be notified by the Govern ment in the
Official Gazette, -
(a) the control and management of all dispensaries and hospitals with
dispensaries and non -teaching h ospitals as per Schedule appended to
this Act, shall stand transferred to and vest in the Corporation and
shall function under its adminis trative control; and
(b) all the assets and liabilities, rights and obligations in relation to such
dispensaries and n on-teaching hospitals, and all obligations of the
Government in relation to them, shall be transferred to the
Corporation on terms and conditions that may be mutually agreed
upon.
13. (1) With a view to securing the services of the best talent avail able in all
fields, the c orporation shall encourage professionals from various disciplines to
join it on contractual terms on such re muneration, as may be prevalent in the
reputed organisations in the country.
(2) The day -to-day management of the Corporation shall vest in the
Managing Director, who will be assisted by experts in the fields of Administration,
Equipment, Procurement and Maintenance, Information and Systems Management
and Health and Financial Managemen t. The Corporation may ass ign some of the se
specialised functions to repu ted external agency.
CHAPTER IV
MISCELLANEOUS
14. All members, officers and other employees of the Corporation shall be
deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act
or any regulation made thereunder, to be public servants within the meaning of the
provisions of the Indian Penal Code , 1860 and the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988. Vesting of
dispensaries and
hospitals with
the Corporation.
Staffing
Pattern .
Members,
Officers and
other
emplo yees to
be public
servants.
15. (1) No suit or prosecution shall be entertained in any court against the
Corporation or against any officer or servant of the Corpo ration or person acting
under the order or direction of the Corporation for anything which is in good faith
done or intended to be done und this Act or any regulation made thereunder.
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any
officer or servant of the Corporation for any act done or purporting to be done
under this Act or any regulation made thereunder without the previous sanction of
the Corporation.
16. (1) The Corporation shall prepare an annual financial stat ement on or
before such date, as may be specified by the regulations, of the estimat ed capital
and revenue receipt and expenditure for the ensuing year.
(2) The statement referred to in sub -section (1), shall include a statement
of salaries and allowances of members, officers and servants of the Corporation
and of such other particulars, as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The Government shall, as soon as may be, after receipt of the said
statement, cause it to be laid on the table of the State Legislature.
(4) The Corporation shall take into consideration any comments made on
the said statement in the State Legislature.
(5) The Corporation may submit at any time during the year in respect of
which a statement under sub -section (1) has been prepared, to the Government, a
supplementary statement, and all provisions of this section shall apply to such
statement, as they apply to the statement under the said sub -section (1).
17. The Government may, with the approval of the State Legis lature make
subventions and grant loans to the Corporati on from time to time for the purpose of
this Act on such terms and conditions, as the Government may determine. Protection of
action do ne in
good faith .
Annual Financial
Statement.
Subventions and
loans to the
Corporations.
18. (1) The Corporation may, from time to time, with the previous sanction of
the Government and subject to the provisions of this Act, and to such conditions,
as may be specified by regulations, borrow any sum required for the purpose of
this Act.
(2) The Government may, for the purpose of this section, empower the
Corporation to borrow by the issue of bonds or stocks or otherwise and to make
arrangem ents with B ankers.
(3) The maximum amount which the Corporation may at any time raise as
loan under sub -section (1), shall be twenty crores of rupees unless the Government
by notification in the Official Gaz ette fix a higher maximum amount.
(4) Stocks issued by the Corporation under this section shall be issued,
transferred, dealt with and redeemed in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
19. The Government may guarantee in su ch manner, as it may think fit, the
payment of the principal and interest of any loan proposed to be raised by the
Corporation or of either the principal or the interest:
Provided that the Government shall, so long as may such guarantees are in
force, lay before the State Legislature in every year during the budget session, a
statement of the guarantees, if any, given during the current financial year of the
State, and an upto date account of the total sums, if any, which have been paid out
of State revenues by reason of any such guarantees or paid into State revenue
towards repayment of any money so paid.
20. In respect of the loans advanced by the Government to the Corporation by
virtue of the provisions of this Act, the Corporation shall pay interest on the cost of
such loans at such rates, as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Government in
consultation with the Corporation and such interest shall be deemed to be a part of
the expenditure of the Corporation. Power s of the
Corporation to
borrow.
Guarantee
of loans.
Payment of
interest to
Government .
21. (1) The Corporation shall cause proper accounts and other records in
relation thereto to be kept, including the proper system of internal check and
prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the income and expenditure
account and the balance sheet in such form, as may be specified by regulations.
The format of the accounting systems may be drawn up by a reputed external
agency.
(2) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited by such firm of
auditors, as may be appointed by the Board of Directors.
(3) The accounts of the Corporation certified by the officer so appointed
or any other official authorised by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarde d annually to the Government and the Government may
issue such instructions to the Corporation in respect thereof, as it may deem fit and
the Corporation shall comply with such instructions.
(4) The Government, may cause the accounts of the Corporation together
with the audit report thereon forwarded to it under sub -section (3) to be laid
annually before the State Legislature.
22. All orders and decisions of the Corporation shall be authe nticated by the
signature of the Managing Director or any other officer authorised by the
Corporation in this behalf and all other instruments issued by the Corporation shall
be authenticated by the signature of such officer of the Corporatio n as may be
authoriz ed by the Corporation in this behalf.
23. (1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Corporation shall
be guided by such directions on questions of policy relating to the functions of the
State or in case of any emergency, as may be given to it by the Government.
(2) If any dispute arises between the Government and the Corporation as
to whether the question is or is not a question of policy relating to the functions of Accounts and
Audit.
Authentication of
orders and other
instruments of the
Corporat ion.
Directions by the
Government.
the State or whether an emergency has arisen, the decision of the Government
thereon, shall be final.
(3) The Corporation shall function under the general supervision of the
Government and the Government shall have power to review the action of the
Corporation taken under this Act.
24. The Government shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made, by
such person or persons, as it may direct, of the affairs and properties of the
Corporation, its buildings, laboratories, libraries, equipment maintained by the
dispensaries and hospitals, medical institutions and also cause an enquiry to be
made into the matters connected with the Corporation. The Government shall in
every case give notice to the Corporation of its intention to cause such an
inspection or enq uiry to be made and the Corporation shall be en titled to be
represented there at .
25. The Corporation may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act to
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: -
(a) the duties of the members, officers and employees of the Corporation
and their salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of
service;
(b) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Corporation and
the manner in which the Corporation shall con duct its meetings;
(c) the administration of the funds and other properties of the Corporation
and the maintenance of its accounts;
(d) the procedure to be followed by the Corporation in inviting,
considering and accepting tenders; and Inspection and
Control.
Power to
make
Regulations.
(e) any other matter arising out of the functions of the Corporation under
this Act in which it is required, necessary or expedient to make
regulations.
26. (1) The Punjab Health Systems Corporation Ordinance, 1995 (Punjab
Ordinance 4 of 1995), is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under
the Ordinance referred to in sub -section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

Repeal and
Saving.

SCHEDULE
DISTRICTS
AMRITSAR -
Sub-Divisional Hospitals :
1. Tarn Taran (50)
2. Patti (50)
3. Ajnala (50)
4. Baba Bakala (50)
Community .Health .Centre (CHC) :
1. Lopoke (30)
2. Majitha (30)
3. Tarsika (30)
4. Jandiala (Ma -awala) (30)
5. Chariala (30)
Khemkaran (30)
7. Sursinghwala (30)
8. Sirhali (30)
9. Naushera Pannuan (30)
10. Mainwind (30)

BATHINDA –
District Hospitals :
1. Bathinda (50)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals :
1. Rampuraphool (50)
2. Talwandi Sabo (30)
C.H.C :
1. Goniana (30)
2. Sangat (30)
3. Nathana (30)
4. Bhagata (30)
Area Hospitals :
1. Bhucho Mandi (4)
2. Maur Mandi (25)
3. Women Hospital s, Rama Mandi (10)
Special Hospitals:
1. Children Hospitals (100)
FARIDKOT –
District Hospitals:
1. Faridkot (50)
C.H.C :
1. Matta (30)
Area Hospitals:
1. Jaitu (10)
2. Kot Kapura (50)
FATEHGARH SAHIB –
District Hospitals :
1. Fatehgarh Sahib (50)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals :
1. Amloh (25)
2. Bassi Pathana (25)
3. Khamano (4)
C.H.C :
1. Gobindgarh (50)
FEROZEPUR –
District Hospitals :
1. Ferozepur (100)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals:
1. Fazilka (50)
2. Zira (50)
3. Nehru Hospital, Abohar (106)
C.H.C.:
1. Jalalabad (36)
2. Mamdot (30)
3. Firozshah (30)
4. Guru Harsahai (30)
5. Dhabwala Kalan (30)
6. Sito Gunno (30)
7. Khuri Khera (30)
Kot Ise Khan (30)
GURDASPUR –
District Hospitals:
1. Gurdaspur (100)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals:
1. Batala (50)
2. Pathankot (100)
C.H.C.:
1. Qadian (30)
2. Kot Santokh Rai (30)
3. Kahnuwan (30)
4. Kalanaur (30)
5. FatehgarhChurian (30)
6. Bam (30)
7. Gharota (30)
8. BungalBadhani (30)
9. Narot Jaimal Singh (30)
HOSHIARPUR –
` District Hospitals:
1. G.H. Hoshiarpur (200)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals:
1. Garh Shankar (50)
2. Mukerian (50)
3. Dasuya (50)
C.H.C.:
1. Bhunga (30)
2. Saroa (30)
Mand Mandher (30)
4. Budha Bar (30)
5. Hajipur (30)
6. Tanda (30)
7. Mahalpur (30)
JALANDHAR –
District Hospitals:
1. GH, Jalandhar (400)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals:
1. Phillaur (50)
2. Nakodar (56)
C.H.C.:
1. Kala Bakra (30 )
2. Kartarpur (30)
3. Mukandpur (30)
4. Shahkot (30)
5. Bandalo (50)
6. Bara Pind (30)
Area Hospitals:
1. Nur Mahal (25)
2. Shankar (25)
KAPURTHALA –
District Hospitals:
1. GH, Kapurthala (125)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals:
1. Phagwara (50)
2. Sultanpur Lodhi (50)
C.H.C.:
1. Kala Sangian (30)
2. Begowal (30)
3. Panchhat (30)
4. Tibba (30)
LUDHIANA –
District Hospitals:
1. GH, Ludhiana (100)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals:
1. Samrala (50)
2. Khanna (106)
3. Raikot (0)
4. Jagraon (50)
5. Payal (30)
C.H.C.:
1. Sanhewal (30)
2. Malaud (30)
3. Pakhowal (30)
4. Manupur (30)
5. Machhiwara (30)
6. Sidhwan Bet (30)
Gur Sar Sudhar (30)

MANSA –
District Hospitals:
1. GH, Mansa (100)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals :
1. Jhunir (30)
C.H.C.:
1. Khiata Kala n (30)
MOGA –
District Hospitals:
1. Moga (100)
C.H.C.:
1. Nihal Singh Wala (30)
Bagha Purana (30)
3. Dudeki (30)
4. Daroli Bhai (30)
MUK ATSAR –
District Hospitals:
1. Muk atsar (50)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals:
1. Malout (38)
C.H.C.:
1. Chak Sherewala (30)
2. Badal (30)
3. Doda (30)
Area Hospitals:
1. Giddhar Baha (50)
NAWAN SHAHAR –
District Hospitals:
1. Nawan Shahar (50)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals :
1. Balachaur (30)
C.H.C.:
1. Banga (30)
PATIALA –
Sub-Divisional Hospitals:
Rajpura (50)
2. Nabha (100)
3. Samana (25)
C.H.C.:
1. Model Town, Patiala (30)
2. Dudhan Sadhan (30)
3. Kalo Majra (30)
4. Dera Bassi (30)
5. Ghanaur (30)
6. Bhadson (30)
7. Badshapur (30)
8. Shutrana (30)
Special Hospitals:
1. M.K.H., Patiala
RUPNAGAR -
District Hospitals:
1. C.H., Rupnagar (100)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals:
1. Anandpur Sahib (30)
2. Kharar (30)
C.H.C.:
1. C.H., Chamkaur Sahib (30)
2. Nurpur Bedi (30)
3. Kurali (30)
Area Hospitals:
1. S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali (50)
SANGRUR –
District Hospitals:
1. C.H., Sangrur (100)
Sub-Divisional Hospitals:
1. Barnala (100)
2. Malerkotla (100)
3. Sunam (50)
C.H.C.:
1. Dhuri (30)
2. Bhadaur (30)
3. Lehragaga (30)
4. Longowal (30)
5. Bhawanigarh (30)
6. Dhanaula (30)
7. Amargarh (30)
8. Ahmadgarh (30)
9. Kauhrian (30)
Total Hospitals = 150