An Act to provide for the utilisation of uncultivated agricultural lands in
the State of Rajasthan and for regulating the cultivation of specified crops.
Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the fifth year of our
Republic as follows —
1. Short title, extent and commencement .- (1) This Act may be called the
Rajasthan Agricultural Lands Utilisation Act, 1954.
1(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan.
*[(3) It shall come into force in such area -and on such date, as .the State
Government may, by notification in the [Official gazette] , specify from time to
time.
2. Definitions .- In this Act unless the context otherwise requires —
(a) "Agricul -tural Land" means land, whether occupied or not, which is used,
or is capable of being used, for agricultural purposes and includes fallow
land.
(b) "Landholder" means the person to whom rent is, or, but for contract
express or implied, would be, payable and includes a Jagirdar, a Biswedar, a
Zamindar, a rent -free grantee, a grantee at a favourable rate of rent, a village
servant, a tenant who has sublet or his mortgagee and an ijaredar or thekedar,
but does not include the State Government;
(c) "Lessee" means the person to whom land is let under this Act;
(d) "Prescribed" means prescribed by or under thhis Act; and
(e) "Tenant" means the person by whom rent is, or, but for a contract, express
or impli ed, would be payable and includes a co -tenant, mortgagee and a
grove -holder.
3. Power to require cultivators to grow specified crops. - (1) Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in any law, custom or practice for the time being, the

1. Substituted by item No. 37 of the Schedule of Rajasthan Act No. 27 of 1957, published in
Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A, Extraordinary , dated 13.8.1957.
* Came into force in the whole of the State of Rajasthan from 15 -3-1958 vide Revenue (B)
Department Notification No. F. 1(1 ) Rev. 9153 dated February 18, 1958, published in
Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -C, dated February 27, 1958 .
Rajasthan Agricultural Lands Utilisation Act, 1954
State Government, if satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest to increase
the production of fodder, food or any other commodity in any local area, may, by
an order published in the [Official Gazette] , direct that in such area every
cultivator shall grow over a specified proportion of his holding such crop or crops
as may be specifi ed in such order, and different crops may be so specified for
different parts of that area:
Provided that no such direction shall be made unless the State Government
has notified its intention of doing so and has taken into consideration any
objections the reto that may be received within a month of such notification.
(2) So long as an order issued under Section (1) is in force, no cultivator shall
grow in his holding any crop other than the one which he is directed by such order
to grow.
4. Utilisation of l and for cultivation purposes in certain circumstances .- (1)
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being
in force, if the Collector is satisfied that any agricultural land has remained
uncultivated for two years or more or has not at all been cultivated, he may, by a
written notice in the prescribed form, call upon the landholder or tenant of such
land. within thirty days from the date of the service of such notice -
(a) to cultivate the said land personally, or
(b) to arr ange for its cultivation forthwith, or
(c) to let out or sublet such land for cultivation.
Provided that no notice shall be issued under this sub -section in respect of any land
which is grove land or which is considered necessary to be retained as pasture land
or which is required to be kept fallow for regaining its fertility or which is by
virtue of any custom or practice used as a threshing floor or a road or a path or an
irrigation tank or for any other like purpose.
(2) If such landholder or tenant show s to the satisfaction of the Collector within
the time specified in sub -section (1) that the land in question is not capable of
being cultivated, or that it is already being cultivated or has been let out for
cultivation, the Collector shall cancel the not ice.
(3) The Collector may suspend the notice if he is satisfied that such land holder
or tenant is making arrangements for the cultivation of the land himself and, if the
whole or any part of such land is so cultivated within the time for which the notice
remains suspended, the Collector shall cancel the notice in respect of the whole or
part so cultivated.
(4) If the notice is neither complied with nor cancelled under sub section (2) or
sub-section (3) the Collector shall order the Tehsildar, to let out s uch land for a
specified period not exceeding [five] years in the prescribed order of

1. Substituted by item No, 37 of the Schedule of Rajasthan Act No. 27 of 1957, published
in Rajasthan Gazette, Part, IV -A, Extraordinary dated 13 -8-1957.
2. Substitued by Section 2 of Rajasthan Act Ni. 28 of 1960, published in Rajasthan gazette,
part IV -A, Extraordinary dated 19 -9-1960
Rajasthan Agricultural Lands Utilisation Act, 1954
preference and in the prescribed manner to a person on a rent to determine d in
accordance with law, and the person to whom such land is let out shall be liable to
pay the rent so determined direct to the land holder.
(5) The Collector after considering objections, if any, may, while ordering the
Tehsildar to let out land as afor esaid, direct that the lessees shall grow there in
specified crops; and, subject to any such direction of the Collector, the Tehsildar
may let out such land for the purpose of growing there in of a specified crop by the
lessees.
5. Appeals. - (1) An Appeal from an order of the Tehsildar under this Act shall
lie to the Collector.
(2) An appeal from an order of the Collector under this Act made otherwise
than on appeal shall lie to the [revenue appellant authority]:
(3) Any appeal under this section shall be preferred within thirty days of the
order appealed from.
(4) The decision or the Collector of the [revenue appellate authority] as the
case may be, on an appeal preferred under this section shall, subject to the
provision contained in sub -section (5) be f inal.
(5) the Board of Revenue may revise any order passed under this Act by a
collector or a [revenue appellate authority] on appeal.
6. Penalties - If any person contravenes any of the provisions of section 3 or
with fine not exceeding five hundred rupees.
7. Order not to be called in question. - Except as otherwise provided in this Act,
no order made or action taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under this
Act sha ll be called in question in any court or before any authority.
8. Bar to legal proceedings. - (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding
shall lie for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State Government for
any damage caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Act.
9. Power to make rules. - The State Government may, by notific ation in
the [Official Gazette], make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
10. [X X X].

1. Substituted by Section 4 of Rajasthan Act No. 27 of 1957 , published in Rajasthan
Gazette, part IV -A, Extraordinary, dated 13 -8-1957.
2. Omitted by item No. 37 of the Schedule ibid
3. Substituted by item (10) of the Schedule with effect from 16 -11-1961 read with section 4
of the Act, published in Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A, Extraordinary, dated 13 -04-1962