An
Act
to provide for the better regulation of buying and selling of agricultural produce and the
establishme nt of markets for agricultural produce in the State of Rajasthan.
Be it en acted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Twelfth Year of the Republic
of India, as follows : -
CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

1. Short title and extent . – (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan
Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961.

(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan.

2. Definitions. - (1) In this Act, unless the subjec t or context otherwise requires, -

(i) “agricultural produce” includes all produce whether o f agriculture,
horticulture, animal husbandry or otherwise as specified in Schedule;

(ii) “Agriculturist” means a person who ordinarily by himself or by his tenants or
hired labours or otherwise is engaged in the production or growth of
agricultural produce, but does not include a trader or broker may also be
engaged in the production or growth of agricultural produce;
1(iia) “Board” means the Rajasthan State Agricultural Marketing Board
established under Section 22 -A
------------------------------------ --------------------------------- ------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Inserted by section 2 of Rajasthan Act no 15 -A of 1973 published in The Rajasthan Gazette, part IV -A, extra ordinary,
dated 14.7.1973

(iii) “broker” means an agent whose ordinary course of business is to negotiate
and make contract s on payment of commission for the purchase or sale of
agricultural produce on behalf of his principal an includes a commission agent
but not include the servant of t he principal whether engaged in negotiating or
making such contract s;

(iv) “bye -laws” means bye -laws made under section 37 or section 38;
1(iva) “contract farming” means farming by a person on his land under a contract
farming agreement in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules
made there under with another person to the effect that his farm produce shall
be purchased as specified in the agreement;
1(ivb) “contract farming agreement” means the agreement made for contract
farming between contra ct farming buyer and contract farming producer;
1(ivc) “contract farming buyer” means the person purchasing agricultural produce,
produced under a contract farming agreement;
1(ivd) “contract farming producer” means a person, who enters into a contract
farming agreement to cultivate on his land the produce specified in such
agreement;
(v) 2“Director” ,means the Director of Agricultural Marketing for the State of
Rajasthan;
(v-a) “export” means dispatch of agricultural produce outside India;
(vi) “fund” means a market committee fund referred to in section 18;

(vii) “market” means a regulated market established under and for the purposes of
this Act for a market area and include a market proper as well as a principal
market yard or a sub -market yard;

(viii) “market area” means any area declared to be a market area under section 4.

(ix) “market committee” means a market committee established under section 6;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------
1. New clause (iva) inserted in Section 2 act no 19 of 2005 published in The Rajasthan Gazette , part IV -A, extra
ordinary, dated 21.11.2005
Extra ordinary, dated 14 -8-80.

(x) “market proper” means the area including all lands with the buildings
thereon, within such distance of a principal market yard or a sub -market yard
as the State Government may declare to be a market proper;

(xi) “person” includes a cooperative society, a firm, an undivided joint family or
an association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not;

(xii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules under section 36;

(xiii) “principal market yard” means an enclosure, building or locality declared to
be a principal market yard under section 5;
1(xiii-a) “processing” means any one or more of a series of treatment relating to
powdering, crushing, decorating, husking, parboiling, polishing, ginning,
pressing, curing or any other manual, mechanical, chemical or physical
treatment to which raw agricultural produce or its product is subjected to and
the expression “processor” shall be construed accordingly;

(xiv) “retail sale” means a sale of any agricultural produce not exceeding such
quantity as may be determined by bye -laws made under section 37 or section
38, to be a retail sale in respect of such agricultural produce;

(xv) “rules” means rules made under section 36;

(xvi) “Schedule” means schedule to this Act;

(xvii) “Sub -market yard” means an enclosure, building or locality declared to be a
sub- market yard under section 5;

(xviii) “surveyor” means a person whose business is to survey a consignment of
agricultural produce for sale in regard to quality, refr action, adulteration or
any other purpose;

(xix) “trade” means any trans action of sale or purchase of any agricultural
produce;
---------------------------------------------- ---------- -----------------------------------------------------
1. New clause (ivb), (ivc), (ivd, (va), (xiiia) in serted in Section 2 act no 19 of 2005 published in The Rajasthan Gazette ,
part IV -A, extra ordinary, dated 21.11.2005

(xx) “trader” means a person ordinarily engaged in the business of buying and
selling of agricultural produce on his own behalf but does not i nclude a
broker;

(xxi) “weighman” means a person whose business is to weigh a consignment of
agricultural produce fo r sale.
(2) If a question arises whether any person is or is not an agriculturist for the
purpose of this Act, the decision of the Director on such question shall be final.
CHAPTER II

CONSTITUTION OF MARKETS

3. Notification of intention of exercising control over purchase and sale of
agricultural produce in specified area - (1) The State Government may, by notification in
the official Gazette, de clare its intention of regulating the purchase and sale of such
agricultural produce and in such area as may , be specified in the notification :
Provided that no area within the limits of a municipality shall be included in the area
specified in such notif ication except after consultation with the municipal board or
municipal council concerned, as the case may be.
(2) A notification under sub -section (1) shall State that any objection or
suggestion which may be received by the State Government within a per iod of not less than
one month, to be specified in the notification, shall be considered by the State Government.
4. [Declaration of market area. – (1) After the expiry of the period specified
in the notification issued under section 3 and after considerin g such objection s and
suggestions as may be received before such expiry and after holding such enquiry as may be
necessary, the State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, declare the
area specified in the notification under section 3 or any portion there of to be a market area
for the purposes of this Act in respect of all or any of the kinds of agricultural produce
specified in the said notification.
(2) The State Government may, at any time by notification in the Official
Gazette, excl ude from a market area any area or include in any market area other area.

--------------------------------------- ------ ---------------------------------------------------------------

5. 1Division of market into yards. – (1) In every market area, there may be -
(a) one principal market yard managed by the market committee;
(b) one or more than one sub -market yards managed by the market committe e;
(c) one or more than one private sub -market yards managed by a person other than
the market committee;
(d) one or more than one consumer farmer markets managed by a market committee
or by a person other than the market committee.

(2) The State Governme nt may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare
any specified place including any structure, enclosure, open place or locality in the market
area to be a market yar d or, as the case may be, sub -market yard.
15-A. Establishment of private sub -marke t yards .- The Director or any other
authority empowered by the State Governme nt in this behalf may grant licence to establish
private sub -market yards in a market area for -
(i) processing of agricultural produce;
(ii) export of agricultural produce;
(iii) trade of agricultural produce of particular specification; and
(iv) grading, packing and trans action in other way by value addition of agricultural
produce.
15-B. Establishment of private consumer -farmer market. – (1) Private consumer -
farmer market ma y be established by developing infrastructure as prescribed, by any person
in any market area. At such place, producer of agricultural produce himself may sell his
produce directly to the consumer in the prescribed manner :
Provided that the consumer shal l not purchase more than such quantity of a
commodity at a time in the consumer -farmer market as may be prescribed.
(2) Market service charges shall be collected on sale of agricultural produce
from the seller at such rate, not exceeding half percent of th e worth of the agricultural
produce, as may be prescribed by the State Government and shall be paid to the proprietor
of the consumer -farmer market.
(3) save as otherwise provided in this Act, no market fee shall be livable on the
transaction undertaken i n the consumer -farmer market.
--------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. New Section 5, 5-A & 5-B inserted by (Act No 19 of 2005). dt 21.11.2005

15-C. Grant, renewal or cancellation of Licence for establishment of private sub market yards or the consumer -farmer markets. – (1) Any person may apply to the
Director or the authority empowered by the State Government .in this behalf for grant of
Licence to establish a private sub -market yard und er section 5 -A, or a consumer -farmer
market under section 5 -B, or for renewal of Licence granted under this section, in such form
and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) An application under sub -section (1) shall accompany with such Licence fees, as
may be prescribed.
(3) Application received under sub -section (1) may be accepted or rejected for the
reasons recorded in writing by the director or, as the case may be, the authority empowered
under sub-section (1):
Provided that a Licence under this sect ion shall not be granted or, as the case may
be, renewed, where –
(i) The market committee dues are outstanding against the applicant;
(ii) The applicant is a minor or is not bonafide;
(iii) The applicant has been declared defaulter under this Act or the rules or bye laws made there under; and
(iv) The applicant has been convicted for any offence and has been sentenced for
imprisonment.

(4) All the Licence s granted or renewed under this section shall be subject to such
terms and conditions, as may be prescribed and the Licens ee shall be bound to follow terms
and conditions of the Licenc e and the provisions of this Act or the rules or Bye -laws made
there under .

(5) The Director may, after such inquiry as he deems fit to make and after giving the
License e a reasonable opportuni ty of being heard, cancel any Licence granted or renewed
under this section, for the reasons recorded in writing.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. New Section 5 -C inserted by ( Act No 19 of 2005). dt 21.11.2005

CHAPTER III

MARKET COMMITTEES

6. 1Classification of market areas and establishment of market committees.
– The State Government. may classify the market areas into super class, A class, B class, C
class and D class marke t areas on the basis of the criteria as may be prescribed and shall
establish a market committee for every such market area.

7. Constitution of market committees. – 2(1) Every market committee shall be
constituted as prescribed and shall consist of the follo wing seventeen members, namely: -

(a) Every super class and A class market committee shall be constituted as prescribed and
shall consist of the following seventeen members, namely : -

(i) Eight shall be agriculturists elected in the prescribed manner by such agriculturists or
institutions of the market area as the State Government. may prescribe;

(ii) Two shall be traders or brokers elected in the prescribed manner by traders and
brokers Licence d by the market committee;

(iii) One shall be the person elected in the p rescribed manner by weighmen, measurers,
surveyors, warehouseman and other persons Licence d by the market committee;

(iv) One shall be the member of Legislative assembly, as nominated by the State
Government;

(v) One shall be the representative of Co -operative M arketing Societies in the market
area for which it is established as the State Government may prescribe;

(vi) One shall be the representative of Central Co -operative Financing Agency in the
market area for which it is established as the State Government may pr escribe;

(vii) One shall be the person elected from amongst its own members by the Municipal
Board or Municipal Council or Municipal Corporation or Gram Panchayat in which
the principal market yard is situated;
-------------------------------------------------- ----------- --------- --------------------------------------
2. sub(i) of Section 7 Sub. by (Act 8 of 2005) published in the Rajast han Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 11 -5-2005 .

(viii) Two shall be the persons nominated by the State Government.
(b) Every B, C, D class market committee shall be constituted as prescribed and
shall consist of following eleven members, namely : -
(i) Six shall be agriculturists elected in the prescribed manner by such
agriculturists or institutions of the market area as the State Government may
prescribe;
(ii) One shall be traders or a brokers elected in the prescribed manner by traders
and brokers Licence d by the market committee;
(iii) One shall be the representative of Co -operative Marketing Societies in the
market area for which it is established as the State Government may prescribe;
(iv) One shall be the person elected from amongst its own members by the
Municipal Bo ard or Municipal Council or Municipal Corporation or Gram
Panchayat in which the principal market yard is situated;
(v) One shall be the persons nominated by the State Government;
(vi) One shall be the member of Legislative assembly, as nominated by the State
Gover nment;
Provided that a person to whom a Licence has been granted under sub -section(2) of
committee under sub -clause(i) or sub -clause(v) or sub -clause(vi) or sub -clause(vi i) of
clause(a) and sub -clause(i) or sub -clause(iii) or sub -clause(iv) of clause(b):
Provided further that State Government may, at any time, reduce the number of
nominated members for any market committee and in their place may increase the number
of membe rs to be elected under sub -section(i) and sub -clause(ii) of clause(a) or, as the case
may be, under sub -clause(i) and sub -clause(ii) of clause(b) as it thinks fit.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section(1) –

1(a) on the failure of any organ ization, persons or authority to elect a member under
sub-section(1), the State Government shall nominate a person on behalf of such
organization, persons or authority who is qualified to be elected as a member of
the market committee from such organizatio n, persons or authority. If the failure
on the part of any organization, persons or authority to elect the required number
of members is on account of the rejection of all nomination papers at the time of
scrutiny, then fresh election shall be held by such organization, persons or
authority but in case of further occurrence of such contingency, the State
Government shall nominate the person in the a foresaid manner; and
(b) when a market committee is constituted for the first time, all the members of the
market committee shall be persons nominated by the State Government.
(3) Every member of a market committee, nominated when it is first
constituted, shall hold office for a term of two years from the date of the first general
meeting of the market committee a nd every such member elected or nominated thereafter
shall hold office for a term of 2five years .
[Provided that in case of a committee constituted under sub -section(2) (b), it shall be
competent for the State Government at any time to terminate the term of office of all the
members of such committee and appoint an Administrator under section 27 -A]
4(4) The State Government may , by notification, extend from time to time the
term of office of the members of a market committee for such period or periods not
exceeding one year in the aggregate as it thinks fit:
Provided that if the term of office of the outgoing members of a market committee
has expired before the commencement of the Rajasthan Agricultural Produce markets
(Amendment) Act, 1973 it shall be deem ed to extend to and expire with the day before the
date of the first general meeting of the market committee constituted in its place or shall
extend to a period of one year from the commencement of the said Act, whichever is earlier:
--------------------- ---------------------------------------------------- ---------- --------------------------
1. Substituted by Section 3a of Rajasthan Act No 15 -A of 1973, published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra
ordinary, dated 14 -7-1973.
4. Substituted by Section 3b of Rajas than Act No 15 -A of 1973, published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra
ordinary, dated 14 -7-1973.

1Provided further that where the term of office of the members of a market committee has
been extended under this sub -section, it shall be competent fo r the State Government at any time to
terminate the term so extended.
(5) [XXX]
(6) If at anytime a vacancy occurs through non -acceptance of office by a person
elected or nominated or through the death, disqualification or resignation of member, or in the event
of his ceasing to be a member under sub -section before the expiry of his term of office, the vacancy
shall be filled up by the election or nomination, as the case may be of a person thereto in the manner
specified above.
(7) Every person elected or nominated under sub -section(6) shall hold office for so
long only as the member in whose place he is elected or nominated would have held it, if the
vacancy had not occurred.
3(8) Every market committee shall elect one of its member to be the Chairman , and
another member to be its Vice -Chairman:
Provided that the Chairman shall be amongst the members elected under sub -clause(i) of
clause(a), or sub -clause(i) of clause(b), of sub -section(1) of section 7, as the case may be.
4(9) No Act of a market committee, or of ant sub -committee thereof, or of any person
Acting as a member, Chairman, Vice -Chairman or Secretary shall be deemed to be invalid by
reason only of some defect in the constitution or appointment of such market committee, sub committee, member, Chai rman, Vice -Chairman or Secretary, or on the ground that they, or any of
them, were disqualified for such office, or that formal notice of the intention to hold the meeting of
market committee or of the sub -committee was not duly given or by reason of such Act having been
done during the period of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman, Vice -Chairman, Secretary or
member of such committee or sub -committee or for any other infirmity not affecting the merits of
the case.
5(10) Every member of a market commi ttee shall, before taking his seat make and
subscribe at a meeting of the market committee, an oath or affirmation in the following form : -
------------------------------------------ --------- ---------------------------------------------------------
1. Adde d by Section 2(ii) of Rajasthan Act No 7 of 1978.
2. Deleted sub. sec. (5) of sec. 7 vide Noti. No F2(8)Vidhi/2/2011 dated 25.3.2011 Pub. in Gaz. of Rajasthan Extra
ordinary part 4(Kha) dated 27.3.2011
3. Sub. sec. (8) of 7 substituted by (Act No 8 of 20 05) pub. in Gaz. of Rajasthan Extra ordinary part 4(Kha) dated
11.5.2005
4. Substituted by Section 3c of Rajasthan Act No 15 -A of 1973, published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra
ordinary, dated 14 -7-1973.
5. inserted by section 3(d) -ibid. Publis hed in Gaz. of Rajasthan Extra ordinary part iv -A dt 14.7.1973

“I______________ having become a member of the ________________(name of the
market committee) swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will faithfully and consciously
discharge my duti es as a member of the market committee without fear or favour” .
(11)(a) A motion of non -confidence may be moved by any member against the
Chairman or the Vice -Chairman by giving notice in such form and to such authority as
may be prescribed and such notice shall be supported by not less than one -third of the
total number of members of the market committee, and such authority shall call within
thirty days a meeting of the market committee to consider the motion and shall preside
over such meeting.
(b) If the motion against the Chairman or the Vice -Chairman is carried by a majority of not
less than two -thirds of the members of the market committee present and voting and by
not less than 50% of its total membership , the Chairman or Vice -Chairman shall cease to
hold office as such and vacate the same on and from the date on which such resolution is
carried out. A notice to this effect shall be affixed by such authority on the notice board
of the office of the market committee.
(c) If the motion is not carried as aforesaid or if the meeting could not be held for want of
quorum, no notice of any subsequent motion expressing want of confidence in the same
Chairman or Vice -Chairman shall be made until after the expiration of six -months from
the date of such meeting.
(12) The meeting of the market committee and quorum thereof as well as the
conducting of business therein shall be regulated in the prescribed manner.
1(13) The process of election of a market committee, once started shall not be
stopped or postponed for an y reason, save for a natural calamity or breakdown of law and order.
17-A. Reservation of seats. – (1) One seat of the member to be elected under sub -clause(i)
of clause(a), and sub -clause(i) of clause(b), of sub -section(1) of section 7 shall be reserved e ach for
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward classes [xxx] respectively.
3(1A) Out of the total number of seats under sub -section(1) 50% shall be reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes or , as the case may
be, the Backward Classes.
3(1B) Out of the total seats of the members to be elected under sub -clause(i) of clause (a)
and sub -clause (i) of clause (b) of sub -section (1) of section 7, 50% [includi ng the
number of seats reserved for women under sub -section (1A ) shall be reserved for
women.
----------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ----------------------------------
1. New section 7 -A inserted by (Act No 8 of 2005) pub. in Gaz. of Rajasthan Extra ordinary part 4(Kha) dated 11.5.200 5
part 4(ka) dated 11.9.2007
3. inserted new clause (1A) (1B) of sub -section 1 of section 7 -A vide Raj. Agricultural Produce Markets (Amend ments)
Act 2009 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 1 1-9-2009 .

(2) Seats reserved under this section shall be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in the concerned market area.
17-B. Reservation of the offices of Chairmen. – (1) Out of the total number of
offices of Chairman of the market committees in the State,16%, 12% and 21% shall be
reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Backward classes
respectively.
(2) Out of the total n umber of offices of Chairman r eserved under sub section(1), 10(50%) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes or, as the case may be, the Backward Classes.
(3) Out of the total number of offices of the Chairman of the mark et
committees in the State, 50 % including the number of offices reserved for women belonging
to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Backward Classes shall be reserved
for women.
(4) Offices reserved under this section shall be allotted by ro tation to different
market committees in the State.
17-C. Determination of reserved seats, - The seats for offices of Chairman under
Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classe s and women under section 7 -A.
8. Incorporation of market committee. – Every market committee shall be a
body corporate by such name as the State Government may specify by notification in the
Official Gazett ee. It shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, may sue and be
sued in its corporate name and shall be competent to acquire and hold, lease, sell or
otherwise transfer any property and to contract and to do all other things necessary for the
purposes for which it is established.

9. 2Powers and dutie s of the market committee. – (1) Subject to the
provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of the market committee –

(i) To implement the provisions of this Act, the rules and the bye -laws made
there under , in the market area;
------------------- --------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Raj. Act No 8 of 2005 pub. in Gaz. of Rajasthan Extra ordinary part 4(Kha) dated 11.5.2005
2. Sec.9 substituted by (Act 19 of 2 005) pub. in Gaz. of Rajasthan Extra ordi nary part 4(Ka) dated 18.11.2005

(ii) To provide such facilities for marketing of agricultural pr oduce therein as
the Director or the State Government may from time to time direct;
(iii) To do such other Acts as may be required in relation to the
superintendence, di rection and control of market or for regulating
marketing of agricultural produce in any place in the market area, and for
the purposes connected with the matter s aforesaid, and for that purpose
may exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be
provided by or under this Act; and
(iv) To do such other things as might be required for the purpose of achieving
the objects and requirements of this Act, the rules and bye -laws made there
under and for facilitating working of the market committee.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions market
committee may –
(i) Maintain and manage the principal market yards and sub -market yards
within the market area;
(ii) Provide the necessary facilities for the marketing of agricultural produce
within the principal market yard and outside the principal market yard and
within the sub -market yards and outside the sub -market yards in the
market area;
(iii) Issue or refuse to issue Licence to traders, brokers, weighmen, measurers,
surveyors, warehousemen and other persons to operate in the market area
and renew, suspend or cancel such Licence , supervise the conduct of the
traders, brokers, weighmen, measurers, surveyors, warehousemen and
other persons operating in the market area and enforce conditions of
Licence;
(iv) Regulate or supervise the auction of agricultural produce in accordance
with the provision and pro cedure laid down under the rules made under
this Act or bye -laws of the market committee;
(v) Conduct or supervise the auction of agricultural produce in acc ordance
with the procedure laid down under the ruled made under this Act or bye laws of the market committee;
(vi) Regulate the making, carrying out and enforcement or cancellation of
agreement of sale, weighment, delivery, payment and all other matters
relatin g to the market of agricultural produce in the prescribed manner;

(vii) Provide for the settlement of all disputes between the seller and the buyer
arising out of any kind of trans action connected with the marketing of
agricultural produce and all matters ancill ary ther eto;
(viii) Take all possible steps to prevent adulteration of agricultural produc e;
(ix) Provide for grading and standardization of agricultural produce;
(x) Make arrangements for employing by rotation, weighmen and hammals for
weighing and transporting of goods in respect of trans actions held in the
market yard;
(xi) Set up and promote public partnership in establishment of an Agricultural
Marketing Extension Unit to carry out extension Activities in its area viz.,
collection, maintenance and dissemination of informat ion in respect of
production, sale, storage , processing, p rices and movement of agricultur al
produce;
(xii) Take measures for the prevention of purchases and sales below the
minimum support prices as fixed by the Government from time to time;
(xiii) Levy, recover and r eceive rates, charges, fees and other sums of money to
which the market committee is entitled;
(xiv) Employ the necessary number of officers and servants for the efficient
implementations of the provisions of this Act, the rules and the bye -laws
made there unde r;
(xv) Regulate the entry of persons and vehicles, traffic into the principal market
yard and sub -market yards vesting in the market committee;
(xvi) Prosecute persons for violating the provisions of this Act, the rules and the
bye-laws and compound such offence;
(xvii) Allotment/disposal of land or any movable or immovable property for the
purpose of efficiently carrying out its duties;
(xviii) Institute or defend any suit, proceeding, application or arbitration and
compromise such suit, proceeding, application or arbitration;
(xix) Make payment of pay, pension, allowances, gratuities, contribution
towards leave allowance, pensions or provident fund of the officers and
servants employed by the market committee in the prescribed manner;
(xx) Administer market committee fund and maintain the a ccount there of in the
prescribed manner;

(xxi) Keep a set of standard weights and measures in each principal market yard
and sub - market yard against which weighment and measurement may be
checked;
(xxii) Inspect and verify scales, weights and measures in use in a mar ket area and
also the books of accounts and other documents maintained by the traders,
brokers, weighmen, measurers, surveyors, warehousemen and other
persons to operate in the market area in such manner as may be prescribed;
(xxiii) Carry out publicity about the benefits of regulation, the system of
trans action, facilities provided in the market yard etc. through such means
as posters, pamphlets, hoardings, cinema slides, film shows, group
meetings etc., or through any other means considered more effective or
necessary;
(xxiv) Ensure payment in respect of trans actions which take place in the market
yard or market area to be made on the same day to the seller, and in default
to seize the agricultural produce in question along with other property of
the person concerned an d to arrange for resale thereof and in the event of
loss, to recover the same from the original buyer together with charges for
recovery of losses, if any, from the original buyer and effect payment of
the price of the agricultural produce to the seller;
(xxv) Recover the charges in respect of weighmen and hammals and distribute
the same to weighmen and hammals if not paid by the purchaser or seller ,
as the case may be;
(xxvi) With the prior sanction of the State Government, undertake the
construction of roads in the ma rket area to facilitate movement of
agricultural produce to the market for benefit of producers, sellers, traders
operating in the market area;
(xxvii ) Collect and maintain information in respect of production, sale, storage,
processing, prices and movement of agr icultural produce and disseminate
such information as directed by the Director; and
(xxviii ) With a view to maintain stability in the market, -
(a) take suitable measures to ensure that traders do not buy agricultural
produce beyond their capacity and avoid risk to the sellers in disposing off
the produce; and
(b) grant Licence only after obtaining necessary security in cash or bank
guarantee according to the capacity of the buyers.

(3) With the prior sanction of the Director the market committee may, at its
discretion, un der take to give grant or advance funds to the Board, the Public Works
Department or any other Department or a public undertaking or any other agency authorized
by the Director for the construction of roads or godowns in the market area to facilitate
trans portation and storage of agricultural produce or for the purpose of development of the
market yard.
(4) In addition to the duties aforementioned the market committee shall also
be responsible for –
(a) the Maintenance of proper checks on all receipts and p ayment by its officers;
(b) the proper execution of all works chargeable to the market committee fund; and
(c) keeping a copy of this Act and of the rules and notifications issued there under
and of its bye -laws, open to inspection free of charge at its of fice.
10. Appointment of sub -committees and joint -committees. – The market
committee may appoint one or more of its members to be a sub -committee or to be a joint committee for the conduct of any work or to report on any matter or matters and may
delegate to s uch committee or any one or more of its members such of its powers or duties
as it may think fit.
11. Appointment and salaries of servants of the market committee. – (1) The
market committee may employ in the prescribed manner such officers and servants as may
be necessary for the management of the market and may pay such officers and servants such
salaries as the market committee thinks fit.
(2) The market committee shall, in the case of any officer or servant of
Government. whom it employees, pay such pension contribution, gratuity or leave
allowance as may be required by the conditions of his service under the State Government.
for the time being in the force.
(3) The market committee may also, in the case of any of its officers and
servants, provide for the payment to them of such leave allowances, pensions or gratuities as
it deems proper and may contribute to any provident fund which may be established for the
benefit of such officers and servants.
(4) The powers conferred by this section on the market comm ittee shall be
exercised subject to any rules, which may be made in this behalf by the State Government.
111-A. Direction to reduce the staff or terminate irregular appointments. – (1) If,
at any time, it appears to the Director that the number of persons employed by a market
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Rajasthan Act No 15 -A of 1973 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 14 -7-1973.

committee i s in excess of the requirements or that an irregular appointment has been made
by the market committee, the Director shall issue a direction to reduce the number of such
employees or terminate the irregular appointment and the market committee shall, on su ch a
direction from the Director, reduce the number of such employees or term inate the irregular
appointment,

(2) Any direction issued to the market committee under sub -section(1) shall be
complied within such time as the Director may, in each case, speci fy which in no case shall
be less than one month and in case of non -compliance, the Secretary shall, after giving one
month’s notice to the concerned employee, stop payment of pay and allowances to such
employee and terminate his services.

(3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the market committee or from the
notice of termination of services served by the Secretary may, within fifteen days from the
date of receipt of such order or notice, appeal to the State Government and the order of the
State Governm ent, in appeal shall be final and shall not be called in question by any court.

111-B. Appointment of Secretary of market committee. – (1) There shall be
appointed a Secretary for each market committee who shall be the Chief Executive Officer
of the marke t committee and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are
specified in this Act or in the rules or bye -laws.
(2) The Secretary shall be a person in the full time employment of the State
Government .and he shall be governed by the Rajasthan Service Rules and shall get besides
pay such allowances as may be fixed by the State Government.

12. Members, etc, to be deemed public servants. – All members, officers and
servants of every market committee and of its sub -committees and joint committees
appo inted under section 16 shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of

13. Execution of contract s. – (1) Every contract entered into by market
committee shall be in writing and sha ll be signed on behalf of the market c ommittee by its
Chairman and two other members of the committee authorized by the committee in this
behalf.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------- --------------- -------------------------------
1. Inserted by section 4 of Rajasth an Act No 15 -A of 1973 pub. in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, d t 14-7-1973.

(2) No contract , other than a contract executed, as provided in sub -section(1),
shall be binding on the market committee.

14. 1Power of market committee to issue Licence . – (1) Where a market is
established under the provisions of this Act, the market committee may issue and renew
Licence , in accordance with the rules and bye -laws, to tr aders, brokers, weighmen,
measurers, processors, surveyors, warehousemen or other per sons to operate in the market
on payment of the prescribed fees .
(2) The market committee may also grant Licence , -
(a) for direct purchase from the agriculturists for the following purposes,
namely: -

(i) to processor for processing;
(ii) to exporters for export of agricultural produce;
(iii) for trade of agricultural produce of particular specification; and
(iv) for grading, packing and trans acting in other way by value addition of
agricultu ral produce:
2“Provided that no sale or purchase shall be permitted under this clause within the
market proper except for the purposes specified in sub clause(i) and (iv).”
(b) for testing of chemical composition of agricultural produce.
314-A. Licence for more than one market areas. – (1) The Director may issue
Licence s, in accordance with the rules, to traders and processors to operate in more than one
market areas on payment of the prescribed fees.
(2) The Director may refuse to issue a Licence for the reasons to be recorded in
writing.
(3) All Licence s issued under this section shall be subject to the provisions of this
Act and th e rules and bye -laws made there under.
314-B. Suspension and cancellation of Licence s issued under section 14 -A. – (1)
The Di rector may, after such enquiry as he deems fit to make and after giving , in the
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------
1. Rajasthan Act 19 of 2005 pub. in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 21 -11-2005.
2. clause (a) sub -section (2) of sec. 14 vide Noti. No F.2(7)Vidhi/2/2011 dated 27.3.2011 published in the Rajasthan
Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 27.3.2011
3. inserted New sec. 14 -A & 14 -B vide Noti No F.2(12)vidhi/2/2008 dated 11.4.2008 published in the Rajasthan Gazette,
Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 11.4.2008.

prescribed manner, the Licensee a reasonable opportunity of being heard, suspend or cancel
a Lic ence issued under section 14 -A on any of the following grounds namely: -
(a) that the Licensee is found to have committed a breach of any of the terms or
conditions of his Licensee, or
(b) that the Licensee is found to have contravened any of the provisions of this
Act of the rules or bye -laws made there under, or
(c) that the Licen see has been convicted of an offence punishable under this Act
or the rules or bye -laws made there under, or
(d) On any other prescribed ground.
(2) When a Licence has been suspended or cancelled , the holder of the
Licence shall forthwith produce such Licence in the office of the Director for being
endorsed in the prescribed manner and shall not be entitled to claim on account of such
suspension or cancellation any compensation or refund of the wh ole or any part of the
Licence fee or of any other money s.
15. Suspension or cancellation of Licence s under section 14. – (1) The market
committee issuing or renewing a Licence under section 14 may, after such enquiry as it
deems fit to make and after giving , in the prescribed manner, the Licence a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, suspend or cancel a ny such Licence on all or any of the
following grounds , namely -
(a) that the Licence is found to have committed a breach of any of the terms or
conditions of his Licence , or
(b) that he is found to have contravened any of the provisions of this Act or the rules
or bye -laws made thereunder, or
(c) that he has been convicted of an offence punishable under of this Act or the rules
or bye -laws made there under: or
(d) On any other prescribed ground.
(2) When a Licence has been suspended or cancelled, the holder of Licence
shall forthwith produce such Licence in the office of the market committee for be ing
endorsed in the prescribed manner and he shall not be entitle d to claim on account of such
suspension or cancellation any compensation or refund of the whole or any part of the
Licence fee or of any other money.
[(3) The Chairman or the Secretary of market committee may , for reasons to
be recorded, suspend a Licenc e for a period not more than fourteen and seven days

respectively on any of the grounds on which a market committee may suspend a Licence
under sub -section(1).
(4) The Director may for reasons to be recorded in writing , by order, suspend
or cancel any Licence granted or renewed under section 14 on any of the grounds mentioned
in sub -section(1).
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be made without giving an
opportunity of being heard to the market committee and the person against whom the Action
is proposed to be taken. ]

115-A. Power to remove persons from market yards. – (1) The Chairman, Vice Chairman or Secretary of the market committee or any other member, officer or servant
authori sed by the market committee in this behalf, may stop and r emove any person from
the principal market yard or sub -market yards or yards found to be operating without
holding a valid Licence or disobeying the orders in regard to the procedure to be f ollowed in
auction, weighment or any other matter, relating theret o.
(2) Such removal shall be without prejudice to any punishment to which the
person so prevented may be liable under this Act and rules or bye -laws made there under.
[15-B. Regulation of market of agricultural produce. – (1) No person shall,
except in ac cordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules and bye -laws made there
under ,
(a) Use any place in the market area for the sale and purchase of agricultural
produce; or

(b) Operate in the market area as a trader, broker, weighmen, measurer, surveyor,
warehouseman or as other market functionary.

(2) Nothing in sub -section(1) shall apply to the following sale or purchase of
agricultural produce :
(a) where the sale is made by the producer himself to any person for his domestic
consumption in quantity up to four quintals;
(b) which is brought for sale by head load;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Rajasthan Act No 15 -A of 1973, published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinar y, dated 14 -7-1973.
2. Sub -section 15B inserted by Raj. 19 of 2005 Pub. in Raj. Gaz. Part iv -A e.o. dt 21.11.2005

(c) Purchase or sale made by a petty trader up to such quantity as may be prescribed
in the bye -laws;

(d) Purchase made by an authori sed fair price shop dealer from the Food Corporation
of India, the State Commodities Trading Corporation or any other agency or
institution authori sed by the State Government. for distribution of essential
commodities through the public distribution system;

(e) Transf er of agricultural produce to a co -operative society for the purpose of securing an
advance made by such co -operative society.
15-C. Sale of agricultural produce. – (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section(2), all
agricultural produce brought into the market proper for sale shall be sold only in the principal
market yard or sub -market yard or in private sub market yard s:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to bring the agricultural produce produced under
contract farming in the principal market yar d or sub -market yards or private sub -market yards and it
may be sold directly to the contract farming buyer.
(2) Such agricultural produce as may be purchased by a trader from outside the
market area or in the market area from another trader may be brought or sold anywhere in the
market area in accordance with the provisions of the bye -laws.
(3) The price of the agricultural produce brought for sale into market yard shall be
settled by tender bid or open auction system and no deduction shall be made from th e agreed price
on any account whatsoever from the seller .
15-D. Terms and procedure of buying and selling. –(1) Except in case of a trans action
between two traders, any person who buys agricultural produce in the market area shall execute an
agreement in t riplicate in such form, a s may be prescribed in the favo r of seller. One copy of the
agreement shall be kept by the buyer, one copy shall be supplied to the seller and the remaining
copy shall be kept in the record of market committee.
(2)(a) The price of the agricultural produce brought in the principal market yard or sub market yard or private sub -market yard shall be paid on the same day to the seller in
principal market yard or sub -market yard or, as the case may be, private sub -market
yard. Payment of agricultural produce purchased out of such yard or yards shall also be
made to the seller, if he is not a trader, on the same day.

(b) In case purchaser does not make a payment as specified under clause(a), he shall be
liable to make payment within five da ys from the date of purchase with an additional
amount at the rate of 1% per day of the total price of the agricultural produce payable to
the seller.
(c) In case the purchaser does not make payment as specified in clause(b) within the said
period of five days, his Licence shall, without prejudice to his liability under any other
law, be deemed to have been cancelled on the sixth day and he shall not be granted any
Licence or permitted to operate in a market as any other functionary under this Act for a
period of one year from the date of such cancellation.
(3) No wholesale trans action of agricultural produce shall be made directly by any
traders with producers of such produce except , in the principal market yard or sub -market yard or
private sub -market yard , and in accordance with the provisions of this Act or bye -laws made
there under :
Provided that agricultural produce produced under contract farming may be bought directly
by contract farming buyer anywhere.
(4) The commission agent shall recover his commi ssion including all expenses as may
be incurred by him in the storage of the produce and other services rendered by him only from his
principal trader at such rates as may be specified in the bye -laws.
(5) Every commission agent shall be liable –
a) To keep the goods of his principal in safe custody without any charge, and

b) To pay the principal, as soon as the goods are sold, the price ther eof irrespective of
whether he has or has not received the price from the buyer of such goods. ]

[16. Appeal. – (1) any person aggrieved by an order –
(a) Of market committee refusing to grant or renew a Licence , or cancelling or
suspending a Licence , may appeal to the Director;
(b) Of the Chairman or the Secretary, suspending a Licence may appeal to the director;
(c) Of the Directo r cancelling or suspending a Licence may appeal to the Government.
(2) All appeal shall be filed within thirty days from the date on which the orde r is
communicated to the person aggrieved by such order.
---------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------
IV-A Extra ordinary, dated 14.7.1973

(3) The Government or the director, as the case m ay be, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
stay the operation of the order appealed against pending the final decision.
(4) The Government or director shall decide the appeal after giving the authority against whose order
the appeal has been filed, a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why the appeal should not be accepted.

[17. Power to collect market fees. – The market committee shall collect market fees from the
Licences in the prescribed manner on agricultural produce [brought or] bought or sold by them in the
[market area ] at such rate as may be specified by the State Government, by notification in the official
gazette, subject to a maximum of [Rs 2/ -] per hundred rupees worth of agricultural produce [:]
Provided that no mandi fee sha ll be liviable on fruits and vegetables, instead the market committee
may collect user charges in respect of these articles for the services provided by the market committee from
the buyer of the produce at such rate as may be specified in the bye -laws.
[17A. "Power to collect Krishak Kalyan Fee .- (1) The market committee shall collect Krishak
Kalyan fee from the licensees in the prescribed manner, on agricultural produce brought or bought or sold by
them in the [market area ] at such rate as may be specif ied by the State Government, by notification in the
Official Gazette.
(2) The fee collected shall be deposited in Krishak Kalyan Kosh constituted under section 19 -A."
[17B. Power to collect user charge .- The market committee shall collect user charge from the
licensees in the prescribed manner on non -notified agricultural produce and food products brought or bought
or sold by them in the market yards and sub -market yards established under this Act, at such rate as may be
specified by the State Government b y notification in the Official Gazette.
18. Market committee fund. –(1) All money s received by the market committee shall be paid into a
fund to be called “the Market Committee Fund” and all expenditures incurred by the market
committee under or for the purposes of this Act shall be defrayed out of the said Fund.
(2) Any surplus remaining with the market committee after such expenditure has been met shall be
invested as may be prescribed in this behalf.
(3) Every market committee shall pay to the State Go vernment the cost of any additional or special
staff employed by the State Government in consultation with such market committee for giving effect to the
provisions of this Act in the market area for which such market committee is established.
(4) the Dire ctor shall determine the cost of such additional or special staff and shall, when the staff
is employed for the purposes of more than one market committee, apportion such cost among the committees
concerned in such manner as he thinks fit.
(5) The decisi on of the Director, determining the amount payable by any market committee, shall be
final.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------
1. Raj. Act No 10 of 1975 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 19.3.1975
2. Inserted vide noti no F.2(28)vidhi/2/2020 Jaipur, dated 14.09.2020
3. Rajasthan Act No 4 of 1986 Pub. in Gaz. of Rajasthan Extra Ord. Part IV A dt 10.2.1986
4. Inserted vide noti no F.2(41)vi dhi/22014 dated 4.5.2015.
5. Inserted vide noti no F.2( 32)vidhi/ 2/2022 dated 19.07.2024 .

118-A. Contribution to marketing development fund. –Every market committee
shall p ay to the Board before the F ifteenth of every month such amount as may be prescribed but
not exceeding [thirty ] percent of income derived by it from Licence fees, market fees and fines
imposed by the courts.

19. Purposes for which the fund shall be expended . –Subject to the provisions of

1) The acquisition of site or sites for the market ;

2) The maintenance and improvement of the market;

3) The construction and repair of building necessary for the purposes of such
market and for the health convenience a nd safety of the persons using it;

4) The provision and maintenance of standard weights and measures;

5) The pay, pensions, leave allowances, gratuities, compensation for injuries
resulting from accident, compassionate allowance and contribution
towards leave allowances, pensions or provident funds of the officers and
servants employed by it;

6) The expenses of and incidental to elections;

7) The payment of interest on the loans tha t may be raised for the purposes of
the market committee and the provision of sinkin g fund in respect of such
loans;

8) The collection and dissemination of information regarding matters relating
to crop statistics and marketing in respect of the agricultural produce
notified under section 4 ;

9) the payment of the cost referred to in sub -sections (3) and (4) section 18;

[9A Providing facilities such as shelter, shed, parking accommodation, water
for the persons, drought cattle, vehicles and pack animals coming or being
brought to the market and on construction and repair of approach roa ds,
culverts and bridges in the market area and for such other purposes as may
be specified by the State Government; ]

10) any propaganda in favour of agricultural improvement; and

11) the carrying out of the purposes and provisions of this Act and the rules
and bye -laws made thereunder.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
1. Raj. Act no 15 -A of 1973 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 14.7.1973
2. Raj. Act no 4 of 1997 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Extra ordinary 4(ka), dated 23.6.1997

[19-A. [Krishak Kalyan Kosh]. – (1) There shall be a fund called the [Krishak
Kalyan kosh ] whic h shall be administered by the Board.
(2) [Krishak Kalyan Kosh] shall be utilized for the following purposes, namely :
a) To organize studies, seminars, exhibitions, workshops and training regarding
Activities from production to marketing like post harvest management,
storage, transport ation, grading, waxing, packaging, processing, sale and
export of the agricultural produce;
b) to provide financial and technical assistance to organize the afore mentioned
Activities jointly with the private agencies, autonomous bodies and co operative soci eties;
c) to promote marketing of organically produced agricultural commodities,
including fruits, vegetables and of medicinal plants;
d) to develop infrastructure in the ma ndi yard and outside with a view to promote
marketing Activities;
e) to promote use of lates t scientific ; and technical equipments for the promotion
of aforesaid Activities;
f) to promote new marketing strategies like future markets, e -commerce etc;
g) to promote direct marketing of agricultural produces;
h) to provide assistance for the development of packaging, certification, labeling
and marketing of organic produces;
i) to promote development of food parks; agro clinics and agro business centers
with a view to promoting ma rketing of agricultural produce; and
j) to dev elop commodity specific markets
k) [to pro mote any other activities connected with the farmers' welfare with the
prior approval of the Government .]
(3) Every Market committee shall pay to the fund such amount as may be specified
by the State Government. But not exceeding 5 percent of the income derived by it from
Licence fees, market fees and fines imposed by the Courts. ]
[(4) the board may raise fund from any other sources with the prior approval of the
Governme nt.]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------
1. Raj. Act no 15 -A of 1973 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 14.7.1973
2. Rajasthan Act No 9 of 2005 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 11.5.2005
3. Ordiance No 3 of 2019 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 16.12.19

20. Power to borrow. –(1) A market committee may with the previous sanction
of the State Government, raise money required for carrying out the purpose s for which it is
established on the security of any property vested in it and of any [xxx]fees Leviable by it
under this Act.
(2) The m arket committee may , for the purpose of meeting the expenditure on
lands, buildings and equipments required for establishing the market or for carrying out the
purposes and provisions of the Act and Rules or bye -laws made thereunder, obtain a loan
from the State Government.
(3) The condition s subject to whi ch such money or loan shall be raised or
obtained and the time within which the same shall be repayable, shall be subject to the
previous sanction of the State Government.
21. Acquisition of land. – (1) If , at any time after a notification is issued under
sub-section(1) of section 4, the State Government is of opinion that any land is needed for
the purposes of th e Act, the State Government may proceed to acquire it under the
provisions of the Rajasthan Land Acquisition Act,1953 (Rajasthan Act 24 of 1953) or a ny
other law for the time being in force . [Land thus acquired shall be deemed to ha ve been
acquired for a public purpose].
(2) When such land vests in the State Government, it shall be transferred by the
State Government to the market committee, on payment by the market committee of the
compensation awarded under the said Act or other la w and of all other charges incurred by
the State Government on the account of acquisition within such period and in such manner
as the State Government may, by general or s pecial order, determine and on such transfer,
the land shall vest in the market comm ittee.
1(3) The market committee shall, not, without previous sanction of the State
Government, sell, gift, mortgage, lease or otherwise transfer any land which has been
purchased or taken on lease by it or which has been acquired for and vested in the mar ket
committee under sub -section(1) and sub -section (2) or utilize such land for a purpose other
than that for which it has been purchased, taken on lease or, acquired.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
1. Ordiance No 3 of 2019 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 16.12.19
2. Omitted by Rajasthan Act No 16 of 1965 Pub. in Rajasthan Gaz. Part IVA extra ordinary dt 19.10.1965
3. Raj. Act No 15A of 1973 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 14.7.1973

221-A. Disposal of movable or immovable property. – The market committee may
with previous sanction of the State Government, sell, gift, mortgage, lease or otherwise
transfer any movable or immovable property vested in market committee.

CHAPTER IV

TRADE ALLOWANCE

22. No trade allowance permissible except as prescribed . –[(1)] No person
shall make or recover any trade allowance, other than an allowance prescri bed by rules or
bye-laws, in any market area for any trans action in respect of the agricultural produce
concerned and no civil court shall , in any suit or proceeding arisin g out of any such
trans action, have regard to or recognize any trade allowance not s o prescribed.
Explanation . – Every deduction other than a deduction on account of deviation from
sample when the purpose is made by sample or on account of
deviation from standard when the purpose is made by reference to a
prescribed standard or on account of difference between the Actual
weight of the container and the standard weight or on account of the
admixture of foreign matter, shall be regarded as a trade allowance
for the purposes of this section.
[2) No Licen see shall solicit, receive or recover or collect commissions, market
charges, fee, deduction except as provided in the bye -laws and also from any person other
than those permitted under the bye -laws.
(3) No Licen see and no other person in the market shall solicit, receive, recover or
collect a ny contribution in cash or kind for any function or for any religious, educational or
charitable purpose from the producer in the course of transaction of the notified agri cultural
produce. ]
----------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------
1. Raj. Act No 15A of 1973 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 14.7.1973
2. Insertion of section 21A Raj. Act No 19 of 2005 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -(KA) Extra o rdinary, dated
18.11.2005

[CHAPTER IV -A

STATE AGRICULTURAL MARKETING BOARD

22-A State Agricultural Marketing Board. – (1) With effect from such date as the
Governm ent may by notification appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the
State of Rajasthan a Board to be called the Rajasthan State Agricultural Marketing Board.
(2) The B oard shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a
common seal and subject to such restrictions as are imposed by or under this Act or any
other enactment, shall be vested with the capacity to sue or to be sued in its corporate name,
or acquiring, holding and disposing of , movable and immovable property, of enterin g into
contract s and of doing all things necessary, proper or expedient for the purp oses for which it
is constituted.
22-B. Composition of the State Agricultural Marketing Board. – (1) The Board
shall consist of the following members , namely :-
(a) Ten members elected by the Chairman of the market committees in the State
from amongst themsel ves. For this purpose the State shall be divided into 10
single member constituencies in the prescribed manner and one member shall be
elected from each constituency;

(b) Two traders elected by the trader members of the market committee in the State
of Rajas than in the prescribed manner;

Provided that if a trader is a Chairman of any market committee, he may choose to
seek election from either of the two constituencies;

(c) Secretary to the Government. in the department of Agriculture and Animal
Husbandry of the State of Rajasthan;

(d) Director of Agriculture for the State of Rajasthan;
------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------- ------------------ ------------------------------
1. Raj. Act No 15A of 1973 pub. in Gaz . of Rajasthan e.o. part iv(ka) dt 14.7.1973

(e) Director of Animal Husbandry for the State of Rajasthan;

(f) Registrar, co -operative societies for the State of Rajasthan;

(g) Director of Sheep and Wool for the State of Rajasthan;

(h) One Economist drawn from any uni versity established in the State of Rajasthan to
be nominated by the Government.

(i) [An officer of the rank of Joint Director belonging to the Rajasthan Agricultural
Marketi ng Service ,] nominated by the Government. shall be the ex -officio
member - secretary of the Board.

(j) [Two non -official members of the public nominated by the Government.

(k) Food Commissioner for the State of Rajasthan or his nominee;

(l) Managing Director, Rajasthan State Warehousing Corporation;

(m) Regional Manager, F ood Corporation Of India ;]

(n) 3The Directo r of Agricultural Marketing for the State of Rajasthan.
(2) The Chairma n and Vice -Chairman of the B oard shall be appointed by the
Government from amongst the me mbers of the Board provided that a member elected under
sub-section 1(b) shall not b e appointed as the Chairman or Vice -Chairman of the Board and
provided further that if a Chairman of a Market Committee is appointed as the Chairman or
Vice -Chairman of the Board and he consents to such appointment, he shall be deemed to
have relinquished charge of the office of the Chairman of the Market Committee in favour
of the Vice -Chairman of the Market Committee from the date he assumes charge of the
office of the Ch airman or Vice -Chairman of the Board.
---------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------
1. Rajasthan Act No 11 of 1999 Pub. in Raj. Gaz. Part IV (ka) e.o. dt 14.5.1999
2. Rajasthan Act No 1 4 of 1974 Pub. in Raj. Gaz. Part IV -A e.o. dt 4.9.1974
3. Rajasthan Ac t No 2 of 1980 Pub. in Raj. Gaz. Part IV -A e.o. dt 4.8.1980

22-C. Publication of the name of the members of the Board. – The Government
shall publish the names of the mem bers of the board in the official Gazette .
22-D. Determination of the validity of Election. –The Government shall , if an
election of any member is challenged, determine the validity of the election of member in
the prescribed manner.
22-E. Cessation of membership of elected members of the Board. –(1) A member
elected under clause (a) or ( b) of section 22 -B shal l, cease to be a member of the B oard, if
he ceases to be a member of the concerned electorate.
(2) In case, a vacancy occurs on account of resignatio n, death or cessation of
membership of any member, the vacancy shall be filled by no mination by the Government
from amongst the persons from the constituency from which he was elected and the member
so nominated shall hold office till such time as the member in whose place he is nominated
would have held it.

22-F. Term of office of the m embers of the Board. - The members elected or
nominated shall hold office for a period of three years but the Government may, from time
to time, extend the term by notifi cation for reasons to be recorded in writing, for a period
not exceeding one year in the aggregate.
[22-FF. First Board to be nominated by the Government. – Notwithstanding
anything contained in section 22 -b members of the First Board(including its Chairman
and Vice -Chairman) constituted after the commencement of this Act, shall be nomi nated by the
State Government. and shall hold office for a period o f 3 years from its constitution:
provided that the State Government. may from time to time extend the ter m of office of the
Board to any further period not exceeding in aggregate one year: ]
[provided further that where the term of office of the Board has been extended under the
foregoing proviso, it sh ould be competent for the State Government at any time to terminate the
term so extended.]
222-FFF. Second Board to be nominated by the State Government. – Notwithstanding
anything contained in any other provisions of this Act after the expiry of termination of the term of
-------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Inserted by section 3 of Raj. Act No 14 of 1974 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated
4.9.1974
2. Raj. Act No 7 of 1978 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 3.4.1978

office of the First Board nominated u nder section 22FF, the State Government may at any time
constitute the Second Board by nominating its members(including its Chairman and Vice Chairman) and the Second B oard shall hold office for such period as may be specified by the State
Government:
Prov ided that the State Government may, from time to time, extend the term of office of the
Board constituted under this section to any further period subject however; to the condition that the
total term of the Board so constituted shall not exceed in aggrega te a period of three years.
1Provided further that the State Government, if it thinks fit in public interest so to do , may at
any t ime, by a notification in the Official Ga zette, terminate the term of the Bo ard constituted under
this section and appoint an Administrator to exercise all the powers and perform all the duties and
functions of the Board:
Provided also that where the term of the Board has been terminated under the foregoing
proviso, neither its Chairman nor any of its members shall be entitled t o any compensation
whatsoever in respect of the unexpired portion of his term.
[22-FFFF. Third Board to be nominated by the State Government. – Notwithstanding
anything co ntained in any other provisions of this Act after the expiry or termination of the t erm of
office of the Second Board nominated under section 22 FFF, the State Government may at any time
constitute the Third Board by nominating its members (including its Chairman and Vice -Chairman)
and Third B oard so nominated shall hold office for such p eriod as may be specified by the State
Government:
Provided that the State Government may, from time to time, ex tend the term of office
of the B oard constituted under this section to any further period subject , however, to the
condition that the total term of the board so constituted shall not exceed in aggregate a
period of three years.
Prov ided further that the State Government, if it thinks fit in public interest so to do,
may at any time, by a notification in the Official Gazette, terminate the term of the Board
constituted under this section and appoint an Administrator to exercise all the power and
perform all the duties and functions of the Board:
Provided also that wh ere the term of the Board has been terminated under the
foregoing p roviso, neither i ts Chairman not any of its members shall be entitled to any
compensation whatsoever in respect of the unexpired portion of his term .]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Raj. Act No 2 of 1980 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 14.8.1980
2. Raj. Act No 12 of 2004 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Part IV -A Extra ordinary, dated 10.8.2004

22-G. Powers and duties of the Chairman and Vice -Chairman. – (1) The
chairman shall be the chief controlling and supervising officer of the Board. All other
officers and employees of the Board shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, rules and
bye-laws be under his control.
(2) The Chairman shall, -
a) Preside over th e meetings of the Board and its committees and conduct the
business at such meetings;

b) Supervise the financial and executive matters of the Board;

c) Exercise supervision and control over the officers and employees of the
Board.
(3) The Vice -Chairman shall p reside over the meetings of the Board and its
committees and exercise the powers of the Chairman in the absence of the Chairman.
22-H. Marketing Development Fund. – (1) There shall be a fund called Marketing
Development Fund, which shall be administered by the Board.
(2) All receipts of the Board shall be credited, and all expenditure incurred by the
Board in discharge of its duties shall be debited to the Marketing Developm ent Fund.
[22-HA. Borrowing power of the Board. – For carrying out the provisions o f this
Act, the Board may borrow money –

a) From the State Government; or

b) With the previous approval of the State Government, -
i. From any other agency; or
ii. by issuing debentures on the security , of any property vested in it or on
the security of part of its f uture income accruing to it under this Act,
or the rules made there under. ]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------------
1. Inserted by Act (19 of 2 005) Pub. in Raj. Gaz. Part iv -A e.o. dt 21.11.2005

22-I. Sums of money to be credited to the Marketing Development Fund and
investment of the surplus. – (1) The following sums of money shall be credited to the
Marketing Development Fund : -
(i) Any grants o r loans sanctioned by the government;
(ii) Contributions received from market committees under section 18 -A;
(iii) Loans raised by the Board with the approval of the government;
(iv) Such other sums of money as the Government may direct.
(2) All expenditure incurred by th e Board shall be defrayed out of the said
fund and the surplus funds shall be invested in such manner as may be prescribed.
22-J. Purposes for which the Marketing Development Fund shall be utilized. –
The Marketing Development Fund shall be utilized by the Board for the following purposes,
namely : –
(i) Improvement and regulation o f Agricultural Markets in the state;
(ii) Giving of aid to financially weak market committees in the State in the form
of loans and grants to enable them to discharge their duties and func tions
satisf actorily;

(iii) Payment of salaries, allowances, pensions, gratuities , compassionate grants to
its employees and contributions towards salaries, allowances, pension and
gratuity of the Government employees, if any, serving to the Board. All
expendit ure under this clause shall be the first charge on Marketing
Development Fund ;

(iv) Payment of travelling and other allowances to the members of the board in the
manner prescri bed;
(v) Undertaking, education and publicity in relation to matters connected with
regulated Marketing of Agricultural Produce in the State;

(vi) Meeting of legal expenses;

(vii) Provision of technical and administrative assistance to market committees
including maintenance of staff for rendering assistance to market committees
for such purposes as :-

(a) Engineering;
(b) Auditing of accounts of market committees;

(viii) Training of officers and staff of the market committees and organization of
camps, workshops, seminars an d conferences;

(ix) Grading and standardization of agricultural produce;

(x) Construction o f market roads and approach roads to the market s;

(xi) Construction of market yards and sub -yards and lea ding or transferring these
to the market committees;

(xii) Sanction of loans and advances to its employees in the manner prescribed;

(xiii) Establishment and maintena nce of the offices of the Boards;

(xiv) Expenditure on audit of the accounts of the Board; and

(xv) With the prior approval of the Government any other purpose connected with
agricu ltural marketing.

22-K. Functions of the Board. – (1) The Board shall as far as pos sible and
necessary, carry out the purposes specified in section 22 -J.
(2) The Board shall tender advice to the Government and the market
committees in relation to agricultural marketing as and when referred to.
22-L. Matters on which Board may frame bye -laws. – The Board may frame bye laws for the following purposes, namely –

a) The manner in which the Board may carry out the purposes referred to in

b) Adm inistration of the properties of the Board including the maintenance and
regulation of rest houses, staff quarters and other buildings and assets of the
board;

c) The procedure for giving aid to financially weak market committees;

d) The payment of allowances to the members of the Board and its committees;

e) The person or persons by whom, and the manner in which, a contract may be
entered into or payments made on behalf of the Board; and

f) Any other purpose which, in the opinion of the board is expected to furthe r the
interest s of the Board or the market committees or lead to improvement of
mark eting of agricultural produce.
22-M. Provisions of the Act and rules to apply to the Board. – Save as provided in
this Chapter, the provisions of this Act and the rules applicable to a market committee shall
mutatis mutandis be applicable to the Board. ]
[CHAPTER IV -B

CONTR ACT FARMING

22-N. Contract farming. –(1) Contract farming buyer shall register himself with the
market committee in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The contract farming buyer shall get the contract farming agreement
registered wit h the market committee. The contract farming agreement shall be in such
form, containing such particular s and terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in contract farming agreement, no
title, right s, ownership or po ssession of contract farming producer on his land under contract
farming shall be transferred or alienated or vest in the contract farming buyer or his
successor or his age nt as a consequence arising out of the contract farming agreement.
(4) If any disput e arises between the parties in respect of the provisions of the
agreement either of the parties may submit an application to the market committee to
arbitrate upon the disputes. The market committee shall resolve the disputes after giving the
parties a re asonable opportunity of being heard.
(5) The party aggrieved by the decision of the market committee under sub section(4) may prefer an appeal to the Director within thirty days from the date of decision.
The director shall dispose off the appeal after giv ing the parties a reasonable opportunity of
being heard and the decision of Director shall be final.
----------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Inserted by Act no 19 of 2005 published in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.Pt IV -A dated 21.11.2005

(6) The decision of the market committee under sub -section(4) and decision in
appeal under sub -section(5) shall have force of the decree of a civil court and shall be
enforceable as su ch and decretal amount shall be recovered as arrears of land revenue.
(7) Disputes relating to and arising out of contract farming agreement shall be
settled in accordance with the provisions made herein above and shall not be called in
question in any civ il court.
(8) The agricultural produce under contract farming may be sold to the
contract farming buyer at places other than the market yard except in market proper. The
market fee shall be payable by the contract farming buyer of agricultural produce at t he rates
prescribed under section 17 and in such manner as may be prescribed.

(9) Contract farming agreement may be made for fruits, vegetables, medicinal
plants or aromatic plants and such other agricultural produce as may be specified by the
State Gover nment from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette. ]

CHAPTER V

MISCELLANEOUS

23. [Liability of Chairman, Vice -Chairman and members for removal from
office. – (1) Every Chairman and Vice -Chairman shall, after an opportunity of being heard
is afforded to him, be removal from his office as such Chairman and Vice -Chairman by the
Government for misconduct in the discharge of his duties or for neglect of or incapacity to
perform his duties on for making persistent defaults in the discharge of his du ties and the
Chairman and Vice -Chairman so removed who does not cease to be a member under
clause(b) of sub -section(2) shall not be eligible for re -election as Chairman and Vice Chairman during the remainder of his term of office as member of the market co mmittee.
(2)(a) The Government may if it thinks fit on the recommendation of the
market committee or on any complaint or for other sufficient reason and after giving him an
opportunity of being hear and after such enquiry as it deems necessary, remove a me mber of
the market committee, if such member, in the opinion of the Government has been guilty of
------------ ------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Substitute d by section 14 of Raj Act no 15-A of 1973 published in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.Pt IV -A dated 14.7.1973

misconduct in the discharge of his duties or of any disgraceful conduct, or has become
incapable of performing his duties as a member or does anything agains t the interest of the
market committee.
(b) When under sub -section (1) any person is removed from office of the
Chairman and Vice -Chairman for misconduct in the discharge o f his duties, he shall, from
the date of such removal cease to be a member and shall be deemed to have been removed
from the membership of the market committee also.]
24. Personal liabi lity of members for loss or mis -application s. –Every member
of the market committee shall be personally liable for the loss or mis -application of any
portion o f the fund, if he shall have been a party to such loss or mis -application or if the
same shall have happened through, or been facilitated by gross neglect of his duty as su ch
member and may be u sed for the recovery of the sum of money so lost or misapplied as if
such sum of money had been the property of the State Government.1

25. Duty of officers and members of committee to furnish information. –
When the affairs of a market committee are investigated for the proceedings of such
committee are examined by the Director under section 39, all officers and members of such
committee shall furnish such information in their possession in regard to the affairs of the
committee as the di rector may require.

26. Power to enforce attendance etc. – The Director while investiga ting the
affairs of a market committee or examining the proceedings of such committee under
of the market committee and to compel them to give evidence and to produce documents by
the same means and as far as possible in the same manner as is provided in the case of a
civil cour t by the code of civil procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 190 8)

27. Supersession of market committee. – (1) If, in the opinion of the State
Governme nt, a market committee is not competent to perform or persistently makes default
in performing the duties imposed on it by or under this Act or abuses its powers, the State
Government may by notification in the official gazette supersede such market commit tee.
------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------
1. Substituted by secti on 14 of Raj Act no 15-A of 1973 published in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.Pt IV -A dated 14.7.1973

Provided that, before issuing a notification under this sub -section ,the State
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the market committee for showing cause
why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanation and objections, if any, of
the market committee.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section (1) superseding a market
committee, the following consequences shall ensue –
i. All the members as well as the Chairman and Vice -Chairman of the market
committee sh all, as from the date of such publication, be deemed to have
vacated their offices;

ii. 1The State Government may, in its discretion , by order either constitute a
new market committee under section 7 or make such arrangements for
carrying out of the functions of the market committee as it thinks fit for a
period of six mont hs in a time but not exceeding eighteen months in
aggregate and before the expiry of the said period of th e said period of
eighteen months a new market committee shall be constituted under

iii. All the assets vesting in the market committee shall, subject to all its
liabilities, vest in the State Government.

(3) If the State Government makes an order under clause( ii) of sub -section( 2),
it shall transfer the assets and liabilities of t he market committee , as on the date of such
transfer , to the new market committee constituted under section 7 or to the person or persons
,if any, appointed for carrying ou t the functions of the market committee , as the case may
be.

(4) If the State Gover nment does not make such an order, it shall transfer all
the assets of the market committee, which remain after the satisf action of all its liabilities, to
the local authority within whose jurisdiction the market area for which the market
committee was con stituted, is situated or, if there are more than one such authority to each
of such authorities such portion of the assets as the State Government may determine.
(5) A loc al authority to which assets of market committee have been
transferred under sub -section (4) shall utili se such assets for such object in the area within
its jurisdiction as the State Government considers to be for the benefits of the agriculturists
in that area.
----------------------------- ----------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Raj. Act no 8 of 2005 published in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.Pt IV -A dated 11.5.2005

127-A. Appointment of a n Administrator. –(1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in this Act or rules, if at any time it appears to the Government that on account of a decision
or order of a competent court, a market committee has not been validly constituted under
this Act or that it is disabled from functioning or the term of the market committe e has
expired o r if the total number of vacancies e xceeds one -third of the [total number of elected
members ] of the elected market committee or the market committee is otherwise not
comp etent to function, the Government may by notification , cause all or any powers and
duties of the market committee to be exercised and performed by such officer, in such
manner and for such period and subject to such conditions as it may , by notification direct.
(2) If a market committee is unable to function on account of any of the
reaso ns specified in sub -section(1), it shall be the duty of the secretary and the director to
bring the matter to the notice of the Government as early as possible and to take effective
measure to hold all the properties of the market committee in trust till A ction under sub section(1) is taken by the Government.
(3) All the powers and duties of the market committee exercised and
performed bona fide till the date of the notification referred to in sub -section(1), by the
persons who constituted such market commi ttee, shall be deemed to have been validly
exercised and performed by the said persons; and shall not be deemed to be invalid or called
in question on the ground merely tha t they were not members of a validly constituted market
committee.

127-B. Power of entry and search. – (1) The secretary of the market committee or
any officer authorised by the Government in this behalf may -

(a) For carrying out any of the duties imposed on the market committee under this
Act, inspect at all reasonable times, all accounts, registers and other documents
pertaining to the purchase and sale of notified agricultural produce and enter any
shop, godown, f actory o r other place where such account books or registers or
documents or such goods are being kept and taken and cause to be taken such
copies or extr acts from the account books, registers and other documents
inspected as may be considered necessary;
----------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------
1. Rajasthan Act no 15-A of 1973 pub. in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.Pt IV -A dt 14.7.1973
2. Vide Noti. No F.2(8)Vidhi/2/2011 dated 25.3.2011 pub.in the Raj. Gazette, P art IV -A Extra ordinary, dt 27.3.2011

(b) Seize any account books, registers and other d ocuments for reasons to be
recorded in writing; and an inventory of the account books and registers shall be
prepared and a copy thereof , shall be furnished to the concerned person before
their removal;

(c) Seize any agricultural produce in respect of which h e has reason to believe that an
offence under this Act has been or is being or is about to be committed and
vehicle or animal which he has reason to believe to be in use or to have been used
for carrying such agricultural produce and may detain the same fo r as long as may
be necessary in connection with any proceeding under this Act, or for initiating
prosecution under this Act.

Provided that a report of the seizure shall forthwith be ma de by the person seizing the
agricultural produce, vehicle or animal to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to try offences
under this Act and the provisions of [Sections 523,524 and 525 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898] shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the notified agricultural
produce, vehicle or anima l seized as aforesaid as they apply to property seized by a police
officer:

Provided further that the grounds for seizing any such agricultural produce, vehicle
or animal shall be communicated in writing within twenty four hours of the seizure to the
person from whose possession the same was seized and to the Magistrate having jurisdiction
to try offences under this Act.

(2) Any person aggrieved by such Action may file an appeal to the Director or
any other officer authori sed by him who shall proceed to d ecide the case, after giving the
secretary or the officer so authorized and the owner of the seized property a reasonable
opportunity of being heard and the deci sion of the Director or authoris ed officer shall be
complied with.

(3) The provisions of the s ection 102, 103 of the 1(Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 relating to search and seizure shall , so far as may be , apply to searches and
seizures made under this section. )

28. 1Penalty of contravention of certain provisions. – (1) Whoever contravenes
the provi sion of section 4 shall , on conviction , be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to 3 months and with fine which may extend to two thousand
Rupees and in case of continuing contravention, with a further fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees for every day during which the contravention is continued after the first
conviction.

(2) Any person who intentionally evades the payment of any market fee
payable under section 17 shall , on conviction , be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three months and with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees . The Magistrate shall, in addition to any fine which may be imposed, recover
summarily and pay to the market committee, the amount of market fees due and may , in his
discretion, also recover summarily and pay to the market committee such amount, if any, as
he may fix as the cost of prosecution.

(3) Whoever obstructs t he secret ary or officer authoris ed for the purpose by
the State Government, in entering any s hop, godown, f actory or any place or taking out the
copies of entries in the accounts, registers or other documents or seizing the documents
under section 27 -B shall , on conviction , be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which mat extend to three months or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or
with both; and in case of subsequent contravention, with simple imprisonment for a period
upto three months a nd wit h a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for every such
contravention.
(4) Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act shall , if no other penalty is
provided for the offence in this Act, be punished with fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees .

29. 1Penalty of contravention of section 22. –Whoever contravenes any of the
provisions of section 22 shall , on conviction , be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one month and wit h fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees . However, f or the first offence, he shall be punis hed only with a fine upto o ne
thousand rupees . The magistrate shall in addition to any fine that may be imposed, direct the
person convicted to pay to the market committee the unauthori sed amount so collected or
deducted.
----------------------------- -------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Raj. Act no 15 -A of 1973 published in Raj.Gaz. part IV -A extra ordl. dated 14.7.1973

30. Penalty for contravening provisions of section 25. – If any officer or
member of the ma rket committee, when required to furnish information regard to the affairs
or proceedings of the market committee under section 25 –

(a) Willfully neglects or refuses to furnish any information, or

(b) Willfully furnishes a false information, he shall , on convic tion, be punished
with fine wh ich may extend to fifty rupees.

31. Bar of suit in absence of notice. – (1) No suit shall be instituted against any
market committee or any membe r, officer or servant thereof or any person Acting under the
directi on of any such m arket committee member, officer or servant for anything done or
purporting to be done in good faith as such member, officer or servant under this Act until
the expiration of two months next after notice in writing, stating the cause of Action, the
name an d place of abode of the intending plaintiff and the r elief which he claims, has been
in the case of a market committee delivered or left his office and in the case of any s uch
member, officer, servant or person as aforesaid, delivered to him or left his of fice or usual
place of abode and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered
or left.
(2) Every such suit shall be dismissed unless it is instituted within six months from
the date of the accrual of the alleged cause of action.
[(3) xxx]
32. Trial of offences. –(1) No offence under this Act or any rule or bye -laws there
under, shall be tried by a court other than that of a magistrate of the first class or of a
magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf.
1(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, except upon
the complaint in writing either by the secretary or by any other person specially authorized
by the director.
132-A. Composition of offences. – (1) A sub -committee comprising the Chairman, a
Government. nominee and the secretary may compound an offence committed under this
Act or the rules or bye -laws and mat accept from the offender, for the compou nding of such
an offence, the following sums of money, namely –
-------------------- --------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Raj. Act no 15 -A of 1973 published in Raj.Gaz. part IV -A extra ordl. dated 14.7.1973

a) Where the offence consists of the failure to pay or the evasion of an y fee or
other amount recoverable under this Act or the rules, the fee or other amount
so recoverable and , in addition , a sum of money not exceedin g five hundred
rupees or double the amount of fee or other amount, which is greater; and
b) In respect of offences punishable with fine only a sum of money not
exceeding the amount of such fine.
(2) On composition of any offence under sub -section(1) no proceedings shall
be taken or continued against the person concerned in respect of such of fence and if any
proceeding in respect of that offence has already been instituted against him in any Court,
upon the composition , the charges against him shall be deemed t o have been withdrawn .
33. Fines recovered to be paid into market committee fund. – All fines and
penalties imposed in prosecutions for offences punishable under this Act or under the rules
or bye -laws made there under shall, when realis ed, be paid into and form part of the market
committee fund concerned.

34. 1Recovery of sums due to Governmen t or market committee . – (1) Every
sum due from a market committee to the State Government shall be recoverable as an arrear
of land revenue.
(2)(a) Any sum due to a market committee on account of any charge, costs, expense,
fees, rent or any other amount under the provisions of this Act or any rule or bye law made there under, shall be recoverable from the person from whom such sum
is due, in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue by the Government on
behalf of the market committee.
(b) If any questi on arises whether any money is due or not, to the market committee
within the meaning of clause(a) it shall be referred to the dir ector or an officer
authoris ed by him and the director or authori sed officer shall after making such
enquiry as he deems fit, and after giving to the person from whom the money is
alleged to be due, an opportunity of being heard, decide the question and his
decision shall be final.
----------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------
1. Raj. Act no 15 -A of 1973 published in Raj.Gaz. part IV -A extra ordl. dated 14.7.1973

A. 1Directions by the State Governme nt. –(1) The State Government may give
to the board or market committee general inst ructions to be followed by the board or such
committees for carrying out the purposes of the Act and such instructions may include
directions relating to the purposes for which , and the manner in which the market committee
fund or the Marketing Development Fund shall be spent and the manner in which , the
surpluses with the Boards and Committees shall be kept.

(2) In the exercise of its powers and performances of its duties under this Act,
the board or market committees shall not depart from any general ins tructions issued under
sub-section(1) except with the previous permission of the State Government.

35. 2Delegation of powers. –[(1)] The State Government may delegate to any
officer any of the powers conferred on it by or under this Act except the powers exe rcisable
by it under [xxx] section 7 or under section 36 or under section 40.

2(2) The director may , by an order made in this behalf, direct that any of the
powers confer red on him by or under this Act shall be exercisable also by such officers
subordina te to him as may be specified in such order.

36. Rules. (1)The State Government may either generally or specially for any
market area or market areas make rules for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this
Act.
(2) In particular and without preju dice to the generality of the foregoing
provision, such rules may provide for or regulate –

(a) [the criteria for classification of market areas ; ]

(aa) the election and no mination of members of the market committee, the
manner of election, the preparation and revision of lists of voters from time
to time, the qualifications and disqualification of voters and candidates and
the payment of all expenditure in connection with or incidental to such
election;
----------------------------- ------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. inserted by section 16 of Raj. Act no 5 of 1979 published in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl. Pt IV -A dated 7.4.1979
2. Raj. Act no 15 -A of 1973
3. Raj. Act no 19 of 2005 publis hed in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.Pt IV -A dated 21.11.2005
4. Raj Act. No 8 of 2005 Pub. in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.Pt IV -A dated 11.5.2005

(b) the powers to be exercised and duties to be performed by the market
committee and by its Chairman and Vice -Chairman;

(c) the electio n of the Chairman and Vice -Chairman of the market committee
and his term of office;

(d) the filling of casual vacancies in the office of Chairman, Vice -Chairman or
member of t he market committee;

(e) 1the management of the market and the manner of collection of market fees
by the market committees in the market area;

(f) the issue of Licence d to traders, brokers, weighmen, measurers, surveyors,
warehousemen and other persons operating in the [market area] the form
in which and the condition subject to which such Licence shall be issued or
renewed and the fee to be charged therefore;

(g) the trade allowance which may be paid or received by any person in any
trans action in the agricultura l produce in a market area;

(h) the prohibition of brokers from Acting in any trans action on behalf of both
the buyer and seller of agricultural produce or as a buyer or seller ;

(i) the provision of accommodation , for storing ant agricultural produce
brought into the market;

(j) the preparation of plans and estimates for works proposed to be
const ructed partly or wholly, at the expense of the market committee and
the grant of sanction to such plans and estimates;

(k) the form in which the account of the market committe e shall be kept, the
audit and publication of such accounts and the charges, if an, to be make
for such audit;
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------
1. Raj. Act No 10 of 1975 published in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.Pt IV -A dated 19.3.1975
2. Raj. Act No 8 of 2005 published in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.Pt IV -A dated 1 1.5.2005

(l) the preparation and submission for sanction of the annual budget and the
reports and returns to b e furnished by a market committee;

(m) the investment and disposal of the surplus funds of a market committee;

(n) the regulation of advances , if any, given to agriculturists by brokers or
traders;

(o) the prevention of adulteration of the agricultural produce;

(p) the grading and standardis ation of the agricultural produce;

(q) the keeping of list of prices of agricultural produce in respect of which
market is established;

(r) the manner in which auction of agricultural produce shall be conducted and
bids made and accepte d in any market;

(s) the recovery and disposal of [market fees or other fees ] leviable by or
under the Act;

(sa) [infrastructure for consumer -farmer market, manner of sale in consumer farmer market, quantity of a commodity that may be purchased at a time in
the consumer -farmer market, rate of market service charge chargeable in
the consum er-farmer market;

(sb) manner and form in which application for licence for establishment of
private sub -market yard and consumer farmer market may be made,
licence fees f or establishment of private sub -market and terms and
conditions for such licence;

(sc) manner in which the market committee shall regulate the market of
agricultural produce;
----------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Raj. Act no 19 of 2005 published in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl. part IV -A dt 21.11.2005

(sd)the manner in which the officers and servants shall be employed by market
committees;

(se) manner in whi ch scales, weights, and measures in use market area, and
the books of accounts and o ther documents maintained by the traders,
brokers, weighmen, measurers, surveyors, ware housemen and other
persons operating in the market area may be inspected and verified by the
market committee;

(sf) form in which agreement shall be executed by the pe rson who buys
agricultural produce in the market area;

(sg) manner in which contract farming buyer shall be registered with the
market committee, form of contract farming agreement and particulars and
terms and conditions to be contained in such form and the manner in which
market fee shall be payable by the contract farming buyer. ]

(t) Any matter which , by any provision of this Act, may be or is required to be
prescribed or for which by such provision rules may be or are required to
be made;

(u) Generally for c arrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act.
(3) Any rule made under this Act may provide that any contravention thereof
or of any of the conditions of any Licence issued or renewed there under shall, on
conviction, be punishable with fine which ma y extend to two thousand rupees .
(4) The power to make rules conferred by this section in subject to the
condition of rule being made after previous publication.
[Provided that any rules may be made without previous publication , if the State
Government considers that it should be brought into force at once.]
----------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------

(5) All rules finally made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
they are so made, before the house of the State legislature, while it is in session, for a period
of not less than fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive
sessions and is before the expiry of session in which they are so laid or of the session
immediately following, the ho use of the State legislature makes any modification in any of
such rules or resolves that any such rule should not be made, such rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done there under.
37. [Bye-laws. – (1) Subject to any rules made by State Government under
make bye -laws for the regulation of business and conditions of trading t herein [and for
specifying the rates of user charges leviable under the proviso to section 17 ].
(2) Any bye -law made under this section may provide that any contravention
thereof shall on conviction be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees .
(3) No bye -law made under this section shall have effect unless and until it has
been sanctioned by the Director or any other officer specially empowered in this behalf b y
the State Government. ]
38. Power of Director to make bye -laws. – (1) If a the market c ommittee fails to
make in respect of the market area under its management, the necessary bye -laws under
make such bye -laws and may also provide punishment for the co ntravention thereof in
accordance with sub -section (2) of section 37.
(2) Such bye -laws shall remain in force until superseded by fresh bye -laws
made by the market committe e under section 37.
39. Power of Director to call for proceedings of market committee an d to pass
orders thereon. – The Director may at any time call for and examine the proceedings of
any market committee for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of
any decision or order passed by the market committee under the ru les. If in any case, it
appears to the Director that any decision or order or proceeding so -called for should be
modified, annulled or reversed, the Director may pass such order thereon as he thinks fit.
---------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Raj Act No 16 of 1965 published in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.Pt IV -A dated 29.10.1965
2. Inserted by Notification F.2(41)Vidhi/2/2014 dt 4.5.2015

40. Power of Government to amend the Schedule. – The State Government
may by notification in the official gazette add to, amend or cancel any of the items of
agricultural produce specified in the Sch edule.

140.A - “Power to grant exemption from market fee - If the State Government is
satisfied that it is expedient in the public interest so to do , it may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, exempt , whether p rospectively or retrospectively, any Licence e or class of
Licence es specified in the notification from payment to market fee payable on any
agricultural produce bought or sold by him in the market area without any condition or with
such condition as may be specified in the notification. ”

41. Savings . – Nothing contained in any law for the time being in force relating to
the establ ishment, maintenance or regulation of a market shall apply to any market area
declared as such under section 4 or a fter in any way –
1) The rights of a holder of a Licence granted under the provision to sub section (2) of section 4 or of a market committee or a co -operative
marketing society, required or permitted under section 9 to do so, to setup,
established or continued a market in the market area for the sale and
purchase of any agricultural produce notified under sub -section(1) of
2) The right s of the holder of a Licence granted under section 14.

42. 2Power to remove difficulties. –If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the State Government may as occasion requires, by order, do
anything which appears to it to be necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
----------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------
1. Noti. No F.2(58)vidhi/2/2013 published in Raj. Gaz. Ex -ordl.P t IV-A dated 12.9.2014
2. Raj. Act no 15 -A of 1973 pub. in Raj Gaz. Part IV -A, extra ordl dt 14.7.1973