An
Act
to provide for the levy of toll on certain Motor Vehicles entering in the State of Rajasthan and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Forty -second Year of the Republic
of India as foll ows,-
1. Short title, extent and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan
Motor Transport Vehicles Toll Act, 1991.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Rajasthan.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in
the official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a) "Barrier" means a barrier established under section 4 of the Act;
(b) "Day" means a calendar day;
(c) "Motor Transport Vehicl es" means Stage Carriage, Contract Carriage or Goods
Carriage as defined in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988);
(d) "Operator" means any person whose name is entered in the permit in respect of
the Motor Transport Vehicles as the holder thereof and includes any person for the time
being in charge of the vehicle;
(e) "Toll" means the toll levied under section 3 of the Act;
(f) "Toll Tax Officer" means such officer or officers, as the State Government
may, by notification in the Official Ga zette, appoint to be the Toll Tax Officer for the
whole of the State of Rajasthan or for any area or areas thereof for the purposes of this Act
and includes Taxation Officer appointed under the Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation
Act, 1951 (Act No. 11 of 195 1); and
(g) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 or Central Motor Vehicles rules, 1989 or Rajasthan Motor
Vehicles Rules, 1990 shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the said Act
or Rules as amended from time to time.
3. Levy of Toll. - [(1) There shall be levied and paid to the State Government a toll on
every entry in the State of Rajasthan of motor transport vehicle, plying under a permit granted or
deemed to have been granted under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 by an authority having
jurisdiction outside the State of Rajasthan at such rate not exceeding rupees two hundred per
vehicle as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify from time
to time;
Provided that where toll has been paid in respect of the entry of a vehicle no toll shall be
levied for any subsequent entry thereof on the same day.]
(2) The toll shall be paid by the operator of the Motor Transport Vehicles.
4. Establishment of barriers . - For the purpose of collection of toll, the State
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish barrier at such places as may
be specified in the notification.
5. Prohibition of entry without paying toll. - The Motor Transport Veh icles liable to
pay toll under section 3 of the Act shall not be allowed to enter or ply in the State unless the toll
is paid and the Toll Tax Officer shall have the powers to prevent the entry or plying of such
vehicles in contravention of provisions of t his Act.
6. Powers to stop and seize. - (1) Whenever so required by the Toll Tax Officer or any
other person authorised by him in this behalf, the driver of a Motor Transport Vehicle shall stop
the vehicle, whether at the barrier or any other place within the State, and keep it stationary for a
reasonable period in order to enable the Toll Tax Officer or the person so authorised, as the case
may be, to satisfy himself that the toll, if payable, has been paid and that other provisions of this
Act have been c omplied with.
(2) When the Toll Tax Officer or the person authorised by him under sub -section (1) has
reason to believe -
(a) that the toll has not been paid, he may detain the vehicle or any part or accessory
thereof which is considered sufficient in his opinion for realisation of the toll until
the toll is paid, or
(b) that any breach of the provisions of this Act has been committe d, detain the
vehicle or any part or accessory thereof which is considered sufficient in his
opinion for realisation of the toll and also for maximum amount of penalty
leviable under section 7, until cash security equivalent to such amount is
furnished:
Provided that no action under this sub -section shall be taken unless the operator of the
vehicle has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(3) The vehicle so detained or the security so deposited shall be dealt with in such manner
as may be pre scribed by rules.
7. Penalty. - (1) Whenever the Toll Tax Officer is satisfied after making such enquiry, as
he may deem necessary, that any person has committed a breach of any of the provisions of this
Act or the rules made thereunder, he may order that such person shall pay by way of penalty in
addition to the toll, if any, payable by him, a sum not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees:
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the person has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under this section may, within thirty days
from the communication of such order to him, prefer an appeal against such order to such
appellate authority as may be prescribed and the order of such authority shall be final.
8. Manner of levy, payment and collection of toll etc. - (1) Toll shall be levied, paid
and collected in such manner as may be prescribed by rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the provision of sub -section (1) any toll, penalty or other dues
recoverable under this Act which are not paid within fifteen days of their becoming due, may be
realised as arrears of land revenue.
9. Power of State Government to exempt from toll. - The State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, subject to such conditions, if any, and for such period as may
be specified in the notification, exempt in whole or in part any motor transport vehicle or any
class of motor transport vehicle from the payment of toll.
10. Protection of action in good faith. - No suit, pr osecution or other legal proceeding
shall lie against any person for anything which is done in good faith or purported to be done, in
pursuance of the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
11. Power to make rules. - The State Government may , by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.