C:\Program Files (x86) \PDF Tools AG \3-Heights(TM) Document Converter Service \Temp \07c5f3089c474844f10fb9ef4ecdd9ed.doc 1 GOVERNMENT OF JHARKHAND
DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
The Jharkhand Tourist Places
(Protection and Maintenance) Act, 2015

To protect and maintain the tourist places from deterioration and erosion and
to preserve their tourism potential.
BE it enacted by the Legis lative Assembly of the State of Jharkhand in the Sixty sixth
Year of the Republic of India, as follows: -
1. Short title, extent and commencement –
(i) This Act may be called the Jharkhand Tourist Places (Protection and
Maintenance) Act, 2015.
(ii) It extends to the wh ole of the State of Jharkhand.

(iii) It shall come into force at once.
2. Definition In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, -
(a) "Competent authority" means the authority appointed under section 4 of
this Act;

(b) “Government” means the Gov ernment of Jharkhand;

(c) "Department" means Department of Tourism, Government of
Jharkhand.

(d) ‘‘Public Nuisance" includes any act of commission or omission or
carrying on of any activity, process, operation including the operation of
or plying of vess els or boats or timber, raft or any other floating object in
any part of Dam, River, or Lake which causes or is likely to cause
C:\Program Files (x86) \PDF Tools AG \3-Heights(TM) Document Converter Service \Temp \07c5f3089c474844f10fb9ef4ecdd9ed.doc 2 injury, danger, annoyance to the sense of sight, smell or hearing or
which is or may be dangerous to life or injurious to health or property or
act define under Cr.P.C 1973. and includes oil spillage;
(e) " A Tourist Place or Zone " means a zone, place , site, location , riverbed,
beach, water spring, lake, water fall declared by the Government as
tourist place or zone under section 3 of this Act and shall also include
any place or zone declared by the government as tourist place or zone .

(f) "Tourism potentiality" means the number of person or group of persons
including pilgrims likely to visit a tourist place.
(g) ASSISTANT (TOURIS T) POLICE 1 means those persons appointed /
deputed by the competent authority either from ex -servicemen selected
through army welfare board or from educated unemployed youth from
the local community or any o ther government servant
deputed/authorised for t he same purpose.

(h) "Act" means the Jharkhand tourist place s (protection and maintenance)
act, 2015.

3. Declaration of tourist places or zone -
On and from the date of coming into force of this Act, the Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare any zone place, monument, site,
location as a tourist place or zone for the purposes of this Act, including any
river bank, riverbed, water spring, lake, water course or land, etc.

C:\Program Files (x86) \PDF Tools AG \3-Heights(TM) Document Converter Service \Temp \07c5f3089c474844f10fb9ef4ecdd9ed.doc 3 4. Appointment of competent authority –
(i) Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint any
gazetted officer of the Government to be a Competent Authority either
for the whole of the State of Jharkhand or for each district of the State
of Jharkhand for the purpose of the act.
(ii) The competent authority can appoint or nominate any officer of the
government for the purpose of the act.
(iii) The competent authority can delegate some of his powers, obtained
from the act, to the officers appointed / nominated under subsection ( ii).
(iv) ASSISTANT (TOURIST) POLICE 1 shall be deputed at all notified tourist
place. These ASSISTANT (TOURIST) POLICE 1 shall prevent any
harassment happening to tourists and shall act as informant to competent
authority regarding any public nuissance made at tourist place.

5. Prevention of Public nuisance - Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force, or any instrument, contract or usage or any
order, judgment or d ecree of any court, on and from the date of coming into
force of this Act, -
(a) No person, company, association or firm or any tourist attraction place
run/manage by private body or any other body shall cause any public
nuisance or carry out any activity, process, operation, etc, including the
operation of or plying of vessels, boats, etc. that causes public nuisance
or omit to prevent or remove the public nuisance, which damages or
deteriorates or is likely to damage or deteriorate or has damaged or
deter iorated the tourism potentiality of any tourist place or zone ,
declared as such, under section 3 of this Act.

C:\Program Files (x86) \PDF Tools AG \3-Heights(TM) Document Converter Service \Temp \07c5f3089c474844f10fb9ef4ecdd9ed.doc 4 (b) The competent authority, either on its own motion or upon a complaint
received or upon reference made to it, may, by an order in writing and
without giving any prior notice, prohibit any public nuisance being
caused or prevent any such activity, process, operation as referred to in
clause (a) above being carried out, if in th e opinion of the said
competent authority, it has damaged or deteriorated or is likely to
damage or deteriorate the tourism potentiality of any tourist place, and
pass such interim orders as it deems fit to give effect to the objects of
this Act.

6. Notice for removing the public nuisance - If, in the opinion of the competent
authority, a public nuisance is having impact on the tourism potentiality, it shall
issue notice to the owner, any tourist attraction place run/manage by private
body, occupier, less ee or any person enjoying right of usage or has control of
the object which has contributed to the nuisance and the owner, occupier,
lessee or any person enjoying right of usage or has control of the object, as
the case may be, shall within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of
such notice, abate or remove the same, and unless the same is removed or
abated by the said person within the said period of 15 days or such further
time as may be extended by the competent authority, but not exceeding 3
months, the competent authority shall cause removal of such nuisance . The
competent authority will follow the principal of natural justice and give the
hearing opportunity to the opposition party.

7. Object of Public nuisance shall stand forfeited and vest in the
Government - On the failure of the owner, occupier, lessee or any person
against whom notice of removal of public nuisance is issued, to comply with
the order of removal of such public nuisance within the time fixed by the
competent authority, the m aterial thing or object of nuisance shall stand
forfeited and vest in the Government, except that when such material thing or
object is sold in public auction , any sum over and above the cost of removal
of public nuisance, shall be payable to its owner. I n case the cost of removal
exceeds the sale price in auction the balance shall be recovered from the
concerned owner, as provided in Section 8.

C:\Program Files (x86) \PDF Tools AG \3-Heights(TM) Document Converter Service \Temp \07c5f3089c474844f10fb9ef4ecdd9ed.doc 5 8. Expenses and costs for removing the public nuisance - The expenses and costs
incurred, if any, in removing or abating such public nuisance shall be
recovered from the person who has caused such public nuisance or from the
owner/occupier of the object which has contributed to the public nuisance, in
the same manner as arrears of land revenue by the competent aut hority.

9. Dealing with the property of public nuisance - Any property, thing, material or
object, which is a public nuisance under this Act, may be disposed off or dealt
with by the Government, in the manner it deems fit.

10. Any construction work at a place declared by the Government as a Tourist
Place under the act can only be done after consent of the department /
Authority decided by government through official notification . Any person or
Society or Company or any other body responsible for any type of construction
work at a Tourist Place declared by the government as tourist place without
the consent of the department may be charged a fine upto Rs. 25000.00
(Twenty Five Thousand) either by the competent authority or by the officer
nominated/appointe d for the purpose by the competent authority.

11. (a) Any Alteration in the existing structure at a place declared by the
Government as a Tourist Place under the act can only be done after
consent of the department / Authority decided by government th rough
official notification . Any person or Society or Company or any
other body responsible for any type of such alteration without the
consent of the department may be charged a fine upto Rs. 20000.00
(Twenty Thousand) either by the competent authorit y or by the officer
nominated/appointed for the purpose by the competent authority.

(b) The competent authority or the Officer appointed/nominated by the
competent authority for the purpose of the act may also charge
compensation for the loss occured due to such alteration, which will be
in addition to fine.

12. (a) No person/body is allowed to, intentionally or deliberately, destroy or
damage the structure(s), assets or facilities of the Government at a
tourist place. Any Person/body found guilty for the same may be
C:\Program Files (x86) \PDF Tools AG \3-Heights(TM) Document Converter Service \Temp \07c5f3089c474844f10fb9ef4ecdd9ed.doc 6 charged a fine upto Rs. 10000 (Ten Thousand) either by the competent
authority or by the officer nominated/appointed for the purpose of the
act by the competent authority.

(b) The competent authority or the Officer appointed/nominated b y the
competent authority for the purpose of the act may also charge
compensation equal to the monetary value of loss due to the damage,
which will be in addition to fine.

13. Consumption of Narcotic Substances or Alcoholic Beverage at A Tourist Place
will be treated as an offence . Any person found guilty of consuming Narcotic
Substances or Alcoholic Beverage or helping or assisting the other in
consuming narcotic substances or alcoholic beverage except for medicinal use
may be charged a fine upto Rs. 2500 0(Twenty Five Thousand) either by the
competent authority or by the officer nominated/appointed for the purpose of
the act by the competent authority . Details of offence s and their penalt ies are
attached as Schedule I.

14. Each Tourist Place is being declared as No Smoking Zone. A person found
guilty of Smoking at A Tourist Place will be punished with the provisions in The
Smoking in Public Places Rules, 2008 and Cigarettes and Other Tobacco
Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade an d
Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003 either by the
competent authority or by the officer nominated/appointed for the purpose of
the act by the competent authority.

15. (a) Spreading waste (Plates, Plastic wrappers and bags etc.) at a Tourist
Place is being prohibited. Waste materials can only be thrown in the
Dustbin . Any person found throwing waste , except in the dustbin, at a
tourist pla ce may be charged a fine upto Rs. 3000 (Three Thousand)
either by the competent authorit y or by the officer nominated/appointed
for the purpose of the act by the competent authority.

(b) The Department will construct/provide dustbin at all tourist place of the
state within One year from the date of enactment of the act.

C:\Program Files (x86) \PDF Tools AG \3-Heights(TM) Document Converter Service \Temp \07c5f3089c474844f10fb9ef4ecdd9ed.doc 7 16. It will be t he duty of the visitor(s) to k eep the tourist place clean and not to use
non-biodegradable materials so far as possible . The visitor(s) should use
Biodegradable plates instead of using Plastic or Foam plates, etc. (Non bio –
degradable material) so far as possible.
17. Offences and penalties –
(i) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or fails to comply
with any order or directions given under the Act or obstructs any person
acting under the orders or directions of the Competent Authority from
exercising his powers and performing his functions under this Act, shall
be fine d upto Rs. 25,000/ - (Twenty Five thousand rupees) .

(ii) The provisional of above (Subsection – 17(i)) the penalty will not apply
to the sections of the act in which the provision for penalty has been
made i.e. in section 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.

(iii) Wherever a person or a company or a firm or a society or any other
body is found responsible for any damage of the Government/Public
property at a tourist place, the com petent authority or the officer
appointed/nominated by the competent authority for the purpose of the
act may charge fine and compensation for the damage.

(iv) If any body fails to deposit the fine or compensation charged either by
the competent authority or by the officer nominated/appointed for the
purpose of the act by the competent authority within the stipulated time ,
it shall be recoverd by the co mpetent authority under the provisson
incorporated for recov ering in Bihar and Or issa Public demand reco very
Act 1914.

(v) Any offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and non bailable.

(vi) All offences under this Act shall be tried in a summary way by a Judicial
Magistrate of the First Class specially authorised by the High Court and
the prov isions of Sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply to such a trial provided that when
C:\Program Files (x86) \PDF Tools AG \3-Heights(TM) Document Converter Service \Temp \07c5f3089c474844f10fb9ef4ecdd9ed.doc 8 at the commencement of or in the course of a summary trial under this
section, it appears to the Magistrate that the natur e of the case is such
that it is for any reason, undesirable to try summarily, the Magistrate
shall after hearing the parties record an order to that effect and
thereafter recall any witness, who may have been examined and
proceed to hear or rehear the cas e in the manner provided by the said
Code.
(vii) If any person found guilt under this act then the ASSISTANT
(TOURIST) POLICE 1 /authorised official by department may impose
fine as per schedule I of this act on the spot.

18. Appeal –
(i) An appeal shall lie against the order passed by the competent authority
or the officer appointed/ nominated for the purpose of the act under this
Act to the appellate authority which will be the Secretary, Tourism,
Government of Jharkhand , whose decision on appeal shall be final.
(ii) The appeal must be done within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
order the appeal . In case of appeal received after 30 days from the date
of receipt of the order, if the appellate authority thinks that appeal could
not be filed within the said 30 days for some specific causes or
conditions (illness or some other condition in which the appeal could not
be filed), the appellate authority may accept the appeal after the said 30
days period.

(iii) No appeal in any condition can be accepted after 90 day from the date
of receipt of the order.

19. Protecti on for acts done under this Act - No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie in any court, against the Government, Competent
Authority or any of its officers or persons duly appointed / nominated or
authorized by it in respect of anything which is done in good faith or is
intended to be done in pursuance of or under this Act or the rules made there
under .

C:\Program Files (x86) \PDF Tools AG \3-Heights(TM) Document Converter Service \Temp \07c5f3089c474844f10fb9ef4ecdd9ed.doc 9 20. Certain officers to act in aid of Competent Authority - All officers of the police
force, home guards, person in -charge of Police station shall act in aid of the
orders of Competent Authority.
21. Power to make rules - The Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

22. Power to remove difficulties - If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Government may, by order, do anything not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act which appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: Provided that no such
order shall be made after the expiration of three years from the
commencement of this Act.

Secretary -cum-legal advi sior
Government of Jharkhand .
C:\Program Files (x86) \PDF Tools AG \3-Heights(TM) Document Converter Service \Temp \07c5f3089c474844f10fb9ef4ecdd9ed.doc 10 Schedule - I

Sl No. Offence Penalty

1. Any construction at tourist place
without the consent of department /
competent authority.
Fine upto Rs. 25,000/ -
2. Any alteration in the existing structure
without the consent of department /
competent authority.
Fine upto Rs. 20,000/ - Plus
compensation for the loss occured
due to such a lteration .
3. Intentionally or delibrately destroy or
damage the structure(s), assets or
facilities of the government provided
at tourist place.
Fine upto Rs. 10,000/ - Plus
compensation equal to monetary
value of loss due to the damage.
4. Consumption of Narcotic Substances
at tourist place except for medicinal
use.
Fine upto Rs. 5000/ -
5. Consumption of Alcoholic beverage /
Drunkeness.
Fine u pto Rs. 1000/ -
6. Maliciously hurting or attempt to hurt
tourists at tourist place.
Fine upto Rs. 25000/ -
7. Endangering tourist safety by willfull
act. Fine upto Rs. 20000/ -
8. Molestation of tourists at tourist place
Fine upto Rs. 5000/ -

9. Carry ing offensive materials.
Fine upto Rs. 5000/ -