an act or omission specified in sub -section (1), and shall forthwith forward the
person so arrested to the nearest Executive Magistrate who shall cause him to be
forwarded to the District Magistrate who may thereupon cause such person to be
removed in police custody to such place outside the are a specified in the said order
as he may direct.
(3) The provisions of this Section shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
provisions of Section 24.
chapter II
12. Power to make order detaining certain persons. - (1) The State Government
may, if s atisfied with respect to any person that with a view to preventing him from
acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and there is
reason to fear that the activities of anti -social elements can not be prevented
otherwise than by t he immediate arrest of such person, make an order directing that
such anti -social element be detained.
(2) If, having regard to the circumstances prevailing or likely to prevail in any area
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of a District Magistra te, the State
Government is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, it may by an order in writing
direct, that during such period as may be specified in the order, such District
Magistrate may also, if satisfied as provided in sub -section (1) exercise the powers
conferred upon by the said sub -section:
Provided that the period specified in an order made by the State Government under
this sub -section shall not, in the first instance exceed three months, but the State
Government may, if satisfied as aforesaid that it is necessary so to do, amend such
order to extend such period from time to time by any period not exceeding three
months at any one time.
(3) When any order is made by District Magistrate, he shall forthwith report, the
fact to the State Governmen t together with the grounds on which the order has
been made and such other particulars as, in his opinion, have a bearing on the
matter, and no such order shall remain in force for more than 12 days after the
making thereof unless, in the meantime, it has been approved by the State
Government:
Provided that where under Section 17 the grounds of detention are communicated
by the officer making the order after five days but not later than ten days from the
date of detention, this sub -section shall apply subj ect to the modification that, for
the words "twelve days", the words "fifteen days" shall be substituted .
[12A. Grounds of detention severable. - (1) Where a person has been detained in
pursuance of an order of detention whether made before or after the
commencement of the Jharkhand Control of Crimes Act, 2002 under section 12
which has been made on two or more grounds, such order of detention shall be
deemed to have been made separately on each of such grounds and accordingly -
(a) such order shall not be d eemed to be invalid or inoperative merely because one
or some of the ground(s) is or are. -
(i) vague;
(ii) non -existent;
(iii) non -relevant;
(iv) not connected or not proximately connected with such person; or
(v) invalid for any other reason whatsoever.
and it is not therefore possible to hold that the Government or officer making such
order would have been satisfied as provided in section 12 with reference to the
remaining ground or grounds and made the order of detention.
(b) The Government or officer ma king the order of detention shall be deemed to
have made the order of detention under the said section after being satisfied as
provided in the section with reference to the remaining ground or grounds].
13. Execution of detention order. - The detention or der may be executed any
place in India in the manner provided for the execution of warrants of arrest under
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
14. Power to regulate place and condition of detention. - Every person in
respect of whom a detent ion order has been made shall be liable -
(a) to be detained in such place and under such conditions, including conditions as
to maintenance of discipline and punishment for breaches or discipline as the State
Government may, by general or special order, specify; and
(b) to be removed from one place of detention to another place of detention,by
order of the State Government.
15. Detention orders not to be invalid or inoperative on certain grounds. - No
detention order shall be invalid or inoperative merely be reason -
(a) that the person to be detained thereunder is outside the limits of the territorial
jurisdiction of the State Government, or officer making the order; or
(b) that the place of detention of such person is outside the said limits.
16. Powers i n relation to absconding person. - (1) If the State Government or the
District Magistrate mentioned in sub -section (2) of Section 12 has reason to
believe that a person in respect of whom a detention order has been made, has
absconded or is concealing hims elf so that the order cannot be executed, the
Government or the District Magistrate may -
(a) make a report in writing of the fact to a Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction in the place where the said per son
ordinarily resides;
(b) by order notified in the Official Gazette direct the said person to appear before
such officer, at such place and within such period as may be specified in the order.
(2) Upon the making of a report against any person under clau se (a) of subsection
(1), the provisions of Sections 82, 83, 84 and 85 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply in respect of such person and his property
as if the detention order against him were a warrant of arrest issued by the
Magistrate.
(3) If any person fails to comply with any order issued under clause (b) of
subsection (1), he shall, unless he proves that it was not possible for him to comply
therewith and that he had, within the period specified in the order, informed the
officer mentioned in the order of the reason which rendered compliance therewith
impossible and of his whereabouts, be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained i n the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(2 of 1974)) every offence under sub -section (3) shall be cognizable.
17. Grounds of order of detention to be disclosed to person affected by the
order. - (1) When a person is detained in pursuance of a detention orde r, the
authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, but ordinarily not later than
five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in
writing, not later than ten days from the date of detention, communicate to him the
groun ds on which the order has been made and shall afford him the earliest
opportunity of making a representation against the order to the State Government.
(2) Nothing in sub -section (1) shall require the authority to disclose facts which it
considers to be ag ainst the public interest to disclose.
18. Constitution of Advisory Board. - The State Government shall, whenever
necessary, constitute Advisory Board for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of three persons who are or, have been, or are q ualified
to be appointed as Judges of High Court, and such persons shall be appointed by
the Government.
(3) The Government shall appoint one of the members of the Advisory Board, who
is or has been, a Judge of a High Court to be its Chairman.
19. Referenc e to Advisory Board. - Save as otherwise expressly provided in this
Act, in every case where a detention order has been made under this Act, the
Government shall, within three weeks from the date of detention of a person under
the order, place before the A dvisory Board constituted by it under Section 18, the
grounds on which the order has been made and the representation, if any, made by
the person affected by the order, and in case where the order has been made by the
District Magistrate mentioned in sub -section (2) of Section 12 also the report by
such officer under sub -section (3) of that section.
20. Procedure of Advisory Board. - (1)The Advisory Board shall, after
considering the materials placed before it and, after calling for such further
information as it may deem necessary from any Government or from any person
called for the purpose through the Government or from any person concerned, and
if, in any particular case, it considers it essential so to do or if the person concerned
desires to be heard, after hearing him in person, submit its report to the
Government within seven weeks from the date of detention of the person
concerned.
(2) The report of the Advisory Board shall specify in a separate part thereof the
opinion of the Advisory Board, as to w hether or not there is sufficient cause for the
detention of the person concerned.
(3) When there is difference of opinion among the members forming the Advisory
Board, the opinion of the majority of such members shall be deemed to be the
opinion of the Bo ard.
(4) Nothing in this Section shall entitle any person against whom a detention order
has been made to appear by any legal practitioner in any matter connected with the
reference to the Advisory Board and the proceedings of the Advisory Board and its
report, excepting that part of the report in which the opinion of the Advisory Board
is specified, shall be confidential.
21. Action upon the report of the Advisory Board. - (1) In any case where the
Advisory Board has reported that there is, in its opinion sufficient cause for the
detention of a person, the Government may confirm the detention order and
continue the detention of the person concerned for such period as it thinks fit.
(2) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported that there is, in its opinion,
no sufficient cause for the detention of a person, the Government shall revoke the
detention order and cause the person concerned to be released forthwith.
22. Maximum period of detention. - The maximum period for which any person
may be detained in pursuance of any detention order which has been confirmed
under Section 21 shall be twelve months from the date of detention:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the power of the
Government to revoke or modify the detention orde r at any earlier time.
23. Revocation of detention orders. - (1) Without prejudice to the provision of
any time, be revoked or modified -
(i) Notwithstanding that the order has been made by an officer mentioned in sub section (2) of Section 12, or by the State Government to which that officer is
subordinate.
(2) The revocation or expiry of a detention order shall not bar the making of a fresh
detention order under Section 12 against the same person in any case where fresh
facts have arisen after the date of revocation or expiry on which the State
Government or an officer mentioned in sub -section (2) of Section 12, as the case
may be, is satisfied that such an order should be m ade.
24. Temporary release of persons detained. - (1) The Government may, at any
time, direct that any person detained in pursuance of detention order may be
released for any specified period either without conditions or upon such conditions
specified in t he detention as that person accepts and may, at any time, cancel his
release.
(2) In directing the release of any person under sub -section (1), the Government
may require him to enter into a bond with or without sureties for the due
observance of the condi tions specified in the direction.
(3) Any person released under sub -section (1), shall surrender himself at the time
and place, and to the authority, specified in the order directing his release or
cancelling his release as the case may be.
(4) If any pers on fails without sufficient cause to surrender himself in the manner
specified in sub -section (3), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(5) If any person released under sub -section ( 1), fails to fulfil any of the conditions
imposed upon him under the said sub -section or in the bond entered into by him,
the bond shall be declared to be forfeited and any person bound thereby shall be
liable to pay the penalty thereof.
chapter III
25. Pu nishment for contravention of orders under Sections 3 to 6. - Whoever
contravenes any order under Section 3, Section 4, Section 5, or Section 6 shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years
but in no case it shal l be less than three months and shall also be liable to fine not
exceeding Rs. 5,000.
26. Cognizance of offence. - No Magistrate shall take cognizance of an offence
punishable under the Act, except -
(a) upon a report in writing of the facts constituting su ch offences made by a Police
Officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police; or
(b) upon information received from any person other than a police, or from any
gazetted officer that such offence has been committed.
27. Saving as to orders. - No order made in exercise of any power conferred by or
under this Act shall be called in question in any Court.
28. Protection of action taken under the Act. - (1) No suit, prosecution or other
legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any order made thereunder.
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State Government or any
officer of the State Government for any damage caused or likely to be cause d by
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this
Act or of any order made thereunder.
29. Power to make rules. - (1) The State Government may by notification in the
Official Gazette make rules consistent with the provis ions of this Act for carrying
out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the [Jharkhand Legislative] Assembly while it is in
session for a total period of thir ty days which may be comprised in one session or
in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so
laid or the session immediately following, the [House] agree in making any
modification in the rule or the [House] agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be, so however that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
30. Repeal and saving. - (1) The Bihar Control of Crimes Second Ordinance,
(Bihar Ordinance No. 115 of 1981) is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken in exercise of
any power conferre d by or under the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been
done in the exercise of powers conferred by or under this Act, as if this Act, were
in force on the day on which such thing or action was done or taken.