THE TAMIL NADU FOREST ACT

CHAPTER – I PRELIMINARY

SECTIONS

1. Short Title.
2. Interpretation clause.

CHAPTER – II
RESERVED FOREST

3. Power to reserve forests.
4. Notification by the State Government.
5. Suits barred.
6. Proclamation by Forest Settlement Officer.
7. Bar of accrual of Forest right s. Prohibition of clearings etc.
8. Enquiry by Forest Settlement Officer.
9. Powers of Forest Settlement Officer.
10. Claims to right of occupancy and ownership.
11. Claims to rights of way watercour se, pasture and to forest produce.
12. Provision for rights of pasture or to forest produce admitted.
13. Communication of such rights.
14. Appeal from order passed under Section 11,12 and 13.
15. Appeal under Section 14.
16. Notification declaring forest reserved.
17. Extinction of ri ghts not claimed.
17-A. Power of the State Govern ment to redefine the limits of Reserved Forests in
certain cases.
18. No rights acquired over reserved forest except as here provided.
19. Right continued under Section 12 not to be alienated without sanction.
20. Power to stop ways and water-course in reserved forests.
21. Penalties for trespass or damage in reserv ed forests and acts prohibited in such
forests.
22. Suspension of rights in reserved forests.
23. Persons bound to assist Fore st Officer or Police Officer.
24. Power to declare forests no longer reserved.
25. Forests reserved previous to the passing of this Act.

CHAPTER III

PROTECTION OF LAND AT THE DISPOSAL OF GOVERNMENT, NOT INCLUDED IN
RESERVED FORESTS.

26. Powers to make rules.
27. Powers to close land against pasture.
28. Penalties.
28-A. Penalties for breach of Rules under Section 26.

CHAPTER IV

OF THE CONTROL OVER FORESTS AND LANDS NOT AT THE DISPOSAL OF
GOVERNMENT OR IN WHICH GOVERNMEN T HAS A LIMITED INTEREST

29. On certain lands the breaking up fo r clearing for cultivation etc., may be
regulated or prohibited.
30. In case of refusal by owner, Govern ment may take such lands on lease, or
acquire them.
31. Acquisition of forest or l and under the Land Acquisition Act.
32. Protection of forests at request of owners.
33. Management of forests, the joint property of Gove rnment and other persons.
34. Persons employed to carry out the Act to be deemed Forest Officers.

CHAPTER V

CONTROL OF TIMBER IN TRANSIT

35. Power to make rules to regulated transit of timber.
35-A. Power of Government of India to movements of timber across frontiers.
35-B. Penalties for breach of rules m ade under Section 35 in respect of scheduled
timber.
36. Penalties for breach of rules made under Sections 35 and 35A.
36-A. Possession of Sandalwood under licence.
36-B. Form and conditions of licence.
36-C. Power to cancel or suspend licence.
36-D. Appeal.
36-E. Penalties.

CHAPTER VI

THE FOREST COURT

37. Appointment and constituti on of the Forest Court.
38. The Judge appointed to be the President.
39. Hearing of appeals.
40. Court to pass orders which shall be final.

CHAPTER VI-A

OF THE COLLECTION OF DRIFT AND STRANDED TIMBER

40-A. Certain kinds of timber to be deem ed property of Governm ent until title
thereto proved and may be collected accordingly.
40-B. Notice to claimant of tim ber collected under section 40-A.
40-C. Procedure on claim pref erred to such timber.
40-D. Disposal of unclaimed timber.
40-E. Payments to be made by claim ants before timber is delivered.
40-F. Power to make rules and prescribe penalties.

CHAPTER VI-B

OF ROYALTIES

40-G. Royalties.
40-H. Notice of proposal to cu t and remove royalty trees.
40-I. Joint Mahazar to be prepared before removal of the trees.
40-J. Notice calling claims for Kudivila.
40-K. Inquiry by Forest Office r into claims for Kudivila.
40-L. Award to be made after the inquiry.
40-M. Reference to Court.
40-N. Forest Officers statement to Court.
40-O. Service of notice.
40-P. Scope of inquiry.
40-Q. Form of award by Court.
40-R. Tendering payment.
40-S. Forest Officer to carry out the Court's awards as his own.
40-T. Bar of claims to Kudivila.
40-U. Rules to be made by Government.
40-V. Punishment for felling etc ., trees which are royalties.
40-W. Other provisions not affected.

CHAPTER-VII

PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE

41. Seizure of property liable to confiscation.
42. Procedure thereupon.
43. Timber, forest produce, tools, etc., when liable to confiscation.
44. Disposal on conclusion of trial of forest offence of produce in respect of which it
was committed.
45. Procedure when offenders is not known or cannot be found.
46. Procedure in regard to perishable property se ized under section 41.
47. Appeal from orders under Sections 43,44 or 45.
48. Property when to vest in State.
49. Saving of power to re lease property seized.
49-A. Confiscation by Forest Officer in certain cases.
49-B. Issue of show cause notice befor e confiscation under Section 49-A.
49-C. revision.
49-D. Appeal.
49-E. Award of confiscation no bar fo r infliction of any punishment.
49-F. Property confiscated to vest with Government.
49-G. Bar of jurisdiction in certain cases.
50. Penalty for counterfeiti ng or defacing marks on trees and timber and for altering
boundary marks.
51. Power to arrest without warrant.
52. Punishment for wrongful seizure or arrest.
53. Power to prevent commission of offence.
54. Operation of other laws not barred.
55. Power to compound offences.
56. Presumption that timber or forest produce belongs to the Central or State
Government.
56-A. Punishment for habitual offence.
56-B. Certain offences to be non-bailable.
56-C. Offences under the Act to be cognizable.
56-D. Presumption as to commission of o ffence in respect of scheduled timber.
56-E. Power to amend schedule.

CHAPTER-VIII
CATTLE TRESPASS

57. Cattle Trespass Act, 1871 to apply.
58. Power to alter fines fixed by that Act.

CHAPTER-IX FOREST OFFICERS

59. Government may invest Forest Officer with certain powers.
60. Forest Officers deemed public servants.
61. Indemnity for acts done in good faith.
62. Omitted.

CHAPTER-X
MISCELLANEOUS

63. Additional powers to make rules.
64. Rules when to have force of law.
64-A. Rules to be placed before the Legislature.
65. Government may delegate powers.
66. Recovery of money due to Government.
67. Lien on forest produce for such money.
68. Land required under this Act to be deemed to be needed for a public purpose
under the Land Acquisition Act.
68-A. Liability if person unauthorisedly occupy ing any land is reserved forest, etc., to
summary eviction

THE TAMIL NADU FOREST ACT

Preamble CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

Short Title This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Forest Act,
1882.
3It extends to the whole of t he State of Tamil Nadu
Local Extent Provided that the 4Government may, by notification in the 5Official Gazette,
exempt any place from the operation of the whole or any portion of this Act but
not so as to affect anything done or any offence committed or any fine or penalty incurred or any proceedings commenced in such place before such exemption, and may in like manner vary or cancel such notification;
and it shall come into force on such day as the 4Government may by
notification in the 5Official Gazette direct.

1-A. The provisions of Chapters VI-A and VI-B shall apply only to the
transferred territory.
Interpretation Clause 2 In this Act, and in all Rules made hereunder unless t here is something
repugnant in the subject or context :-

Government "Government" means the 4State Government:

Collector "Collector" means the Chie f Executive Revenue Officer of a district;
Forest Officer "Forest Officer" means any person appoi nted by name or as holding an officer
by or under the orders of the Gove rnment to be a Conservator, Deputy
Conservator, Assistant Conservator 6(Extra Assistant Conservator), Forest
Ranger, Forester, Forest Guard; or to discharge any function of a Forest
Officer under this Act or any rule made there under::

District Forest
Officer District Forest "District Forest Offi cer" means the Chief Forest Officer of a
District or Officer of a portion of a dist rict if in independen t charge of such
portion:
Tree "Tree" includes stumps, bamboos and brushwood;
Timber "Timber" - "Timber" includes trees when they have fallen or have been felled,
and all wood, whether cut up or fashioned or hollowed out for any purpose or
not;
Forest Produce Forest Produce "Forest Produce" includes the following things when found in, or brought from a Forest (that is to say):-
Minerals (including limestone and laterite), surface soil, trees, timber, plants,
grass, peat, canes, creepers, reeds, fiber s, leaves, moss, flowers, fruits,
seeds, roots, galls, spices, juice, cate chu, bark, cao-utchouc, gum, wood-oil,
resin, varnish, lac, charcoal, honey and wax skins, tusks, bones and horns;

Explanation 1 - In the transferred territo ry, "forest produce" also includes the
following things, whether found in, or brought from, a forest or not, that is to
say:-

timber or trees which are specifie d to be royalties under section 40-G.

Explanation II - For the purpose of explan ation 1, timber does not include any
wood that has been wrought for fashioned such as doors, windows, articles or
furniture and boxes:;

Forest offence Forest offence " Forest offence means an offence punishable under this Act
or any rule made hereunder;

Cattle "Cattle" includes elephants, camels, buffaloes, horses, mares, ponies, colts,
fillies, mules, asses, pigs, rams, co ws, sheep, lambs, goats and kids.

River "river" includes streams, canals, ba ckwaters, creeks, and other channels,
natural or artificial.

Land at the disposal of Government "Land at the disposal of Government" includes all unocc upied land, whether
assessed or unassessed; but does not in clude land the property of landholders by section 1 of Act VIII of 1865, 1Tamilnadu (namely), all persons
holding under a sanad milkiyat-i-istimrar; all other zamindars shrot riyamdars,
jagirdars, jnamdars and al l persons farming lands from the above persons or
farming the land revenue under Governmen t; also all holders of land under
riyotwar settlements. Or in any way subject to the payment of land-revenue direct to Government, and all other regist ered holders of land in property right;

Explanation - In the transfe rred territory, "land at the disposal of Government"
also includes all land occupied tem porarily and all land occupied without
permission, whether assessed or unassessed, but does not include land being
the property of jenmie s ro Devaswoms:'
Magistrate "Magistrate" means a Magistrate of the first or second Class and includes a
Magistrate of the third class when he is specially empowered by Government
to try forest offences;
Imprisonment "Imprisonment" means imprisonment of either description as defined in the
Indian Penal Code.
"Scheduled timber" means any timber as specified in the schedule.
Transferred Territory Transferred territory means the Kanyakumari district and the Shencottah taluk
of the Tirunelveli district".

RESERVED FOREST CHAPTER – II

Power to Reserve Forests 3. The 1Government may constitute any land at the
disposal of Government a reserved forest in the
manner hereinafter provided.
4. Notification by the Govern ment :- Whenever it is
proposed to constitute any land a reserved forest, the
1Government shall publish a notification in the 2Official
Gazette and in the Official Gazette of the district.

(a) Specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation
and limits of such lands;
(b) declaring that it is proposed to constitute such land a reserved forest ;
(c) appointing an officer (hereinafter called "the Forest Settlement Officer" ) to inquire into and determine the existence, nature and extent of any rights claimed by, or alleged to exist in favour of , any person in or over any la nd comprised within such
limits, or to any forest produce of such land, and to deal with the same as provided in this chapter.

The Officer appointed under clause(c)of this section shall ordinarily be a person other than a Forest Officer, but a Forest Officer may be appointed by the
1Government to attend on behal f of the Government at
the inquiry prescribed by this chapter.

Suits barred 5. Except as hereinafter provided no Civil Court
shall between the dates of the publication of the
notification under section 4 and the notification to be
issued under section 16, entertain any suit to establish
any right in or over any land or to the forest produce of
any land included in the not ification published under

Proclamation by Forest settlement officer 6. When a notif ication has been issued under section
4, the Forest Settlement Officer shall publish in the Official Gazette of the di strict and at the headquarters
of each taluk in which any portion of the land included in such notification is si tuated, and in every town and
village in the neighbou rhood of such land a
proclamation:

(a) specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation and limits of the land propos ed to be included within
the reserved forests;
(b) setting forth the substance of the provisions of section 7;
(c) explaining the consequences which, as hereinafter provided will ensure on the reservation of such forests; and
(d) fixing a period not less than three months from the
date of publishing such proclamation in the Official Gazette of the district and requiring every person claiming any right referred to in section 4 either to present to such officer, withi n such period, a written
notice specifying, or to appe ar before him within such
period and state the nature of such right and in either
case to produce all documents in support thereof.

The Forest Settlement Officer shall also serve a notice
to the same effect on every known or reputed owner or
occupier of any land included in or adjoining the land
proposed to be constituted a reserved forest, or on his recognized agent or manger. Such notice may be sent by registered post to persons residing beyond the limits of the district in wh ich such land is situated.
Bar of accrual 7. During the interval between the publication of such, proclamation and the date fixed by the notification under section 16,

No right shall be acquired in or over the land included
in such proclamation, except under a grant or contract
in writing, made or entered into by, or on behalf of the
Government, or by, or on behalf of such person in whom such right, or power to create the same was vested when the proclamation was published, or by
succession from such person:

Prohibition of clearings, etc. And no fresh clearings for cultivation or for any other purpose shall be made on such land. No patta shall, without the previous sanction of the Board of Revenue,
be granted on behalf of
1Government in such land, and
every patta granted without such sanction shall be null and void.

Nothing in this section shal l be deemed to prohibit any
act done with the permission in writing of the Forest
Settlement Officer.
Enquiry by Forest Settlement Officer 8. The Forest Settlement Officer shall take down in
writing all statem ents made under section 6, and shall
inquire into all claims made under the section
recording the evidence in the manner prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure
2in appeal able cases.
The Forest Settlement Officer shall at the same time
consider and record any objection which the Forest Officer (if any) appointed under section 4 may make to any such claim.
9. For the purpose of such enquiry the Forest Settlement Officer may exercise the following powers (that is to say):- Powers of Forest Settlement Officer
(a) power to enter, by himself or any officer authorized by him for the purpose, upon any land, and
to survey, demarcate and make a map of the same; and
(b) the powers conferred on a Civil Court by the Code of Civil Procedure for compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents.

10. In the case of a claim to a right in or over and land other than the following rights
(a) A right of way;
(b) A right to a water-c ourse, or to use of water;
(c) A right of pasture; or
(d) A right to forest produce
The Forest Settlement Offi cer shall pass an order
specifying the particulars of such claim and admitting
or rejecting the same wholly or in part

Admitted claims (i) If such claim is admitted wholly or in part, the
Forest Settlement Office r may (1) come to an
agreement with the claimant for the surrender of the
right; or (2) exclude the l and from the limits of the
proposed forests, or (3) proceed to acquire such land
in the manner provided by the Land Acquisition Act,
1870.

For the purpose of so acquiring such lands:-

(i) the Forest Settlement Officer shall be
deemed to be a Collector proceeding under the Land Acquisition Act, 1870
(ii) the claimant shall be deemed to be a
person interested and appearing before him in pursuance of a notice give n under section 9 of
that Act.
(iii) The provisions of the preceding sections
of that Act shall be deemed to have been
complied with; and
(iv) The Fo rest Settlement Officer with the
consent of the claimant, or the Court (as
defined in the said Act) with the consent of the
claimant and of the Collector of the district may award compensation by the grant of right in or
over land, or by the payment of money, or both.

Rejected Claims appeals (2) If such claim is reje cted wholly or in part, the
claimant may, within thirty days from the date of the
order prefer an appeal to the District Court in respect of such, rejection only; provided, that the
1Government
may, on just and reasonable cause for the same being
shown, extend the period for such appeal within such further period as may seem proper, and an order or endorsement under the signature of one of the Secretaries to Government shall be sufficient authority
for the said Court to entertain such appeal beyond the limit above specified. If t he court decides that the
claim or such part thereof as has been rejected should,
be admitted, the Forest Settlement Officer shall proceed to deal with it in like manners as if it had been
in the first instance admitted by himself.

(3) When a claim has been admitted in the first instance wholly or in par t, a like appeal may be
preferred on behalf of Gove rnment by the Forest
Officer appointed under section 4 or other person generally or specially empowered by the
1Government
in this behalf.

Claims to rights of way
watercourse pasture and to Forest produce 11. In the case of a cl aim to rights of the kind
specified in clauses (a) , (b), (c) and (d) of section 10,
the Forest Settlement Officer shall pass an order specifying the particulars of such claim as far as may
be necessary to define the nature incidents and extent
of the rights, claimed and admitting or rejecting such claim wholly or in part,
When a claim to any such right is admitted, if the right is for the beneficial enjoyment of any land or buildings,
he shall record the designation, position and area of such land, and the designati on, position and area of
such land, and the designation and position of such
buildings.

Where the right is a right to forest produce, he shall
also record whether the forest produce, obtained by
the exercise of such right may be sold or bartered.
Provision of rights of pasture or to Forest produce admitted 12. When the Forest Settl ement Officer has admitted
wholly or in part, and recorded under section 11, a claim to a right of pasture or to forest produce, he
shall, as far as possible, provide for the exercise of
such right:-
(a) by altering the limits of the proposed reserved forest so as to exclude l and of sufficient extent, of
suitable kind, and in a locali ty reasonably convenient
for the purposes of the claimant;
(b) by recording an order continuing to the claimant a right of pasture or to fo rest produce (as the case
may be) subject to such rules as may be prescribed by the
1Government
The order passed under clause (b) shall record as far as practicable, the number and description of the cattle
which the claimant is from time to time entitled to
graze, the local limits within which and the seasons during, which such pastu re is permitted; or;

The quantity of timber or ot her forest produce which
the claimant is authorized to take or receive, the local limits within which, the s eason during which and the
mode in which the taking of such produce is permitted; and;
Such other particulars as may be required in order
define the extent of the right which is continued, and
the mode in which it may be exercised.
Commutation of such rights 13. Whenever any right of pasture or to forest produce
admitted under section 11 is not provided for in one of
the ways prescribed in section 12, the Forest Settlement Officer shall, subject, to such rules as the Government, may prescribe in this behalf, commute
such right by paying a sum of money in lieu thereof or with the consent of the claiman t, by the grant of right in
or over land or in such other manner as such officer thinks fit.

Appeal from order passed under sections 11,12 and 13 14. The claimant or the Forest Officer appointed under section 4, or any other per son generally or specially
empowered by the government in this behalf may within 60 days, from the dat e of any order passed by
the Forest Settlement Office r under sections 11,12,
and 13 present an appeal from such order

to a forest Court constituted as hereinafter provided or where no such court is consti tuted, to such officer of
the Revenue Department of not less than 12 years
standing as the
1Government may, from time to time
by notification in the 2Official Gazette appoint by name
or as holding an office, to hear appeals from such
orders.
In disposing of such appeals the Revenue Officer appointed as aforesaid shall be guided by the
provisions of sections 39 and 40 of this Act.
Appeal under section 14 15. Every appeal under sect ion 14 shall be made by
petition in writing, and may be delivered to the Forest
Settlement Officer who shall forward it without delay to
the appellate authority.
16. When the following events have occurred
namely:-
(a) the period fixed under section 6 for preferring
claims has elapsed; and all claims (if any) made within such period have been disposed of by the Forest
Settlement Officer; and
(b) if such claims have been made, the period fixed
by sections 10 and 14 for app ealing from the orders
passed on such claims has elapsed, and all appeals
(if any) presented within such period have been disposed of by the appellate authority and;
(c) all proceedings prescribed by section 10 have been taken and all lands (if any) to be included in the proposed forest which the Forest Settlement Officer has under section 10 elected to acquire under the Land Acquisition Act, 1870, have become vested in the Government under section 16 of that Act;
The 1Government may publish a 2notification in the
3Official Gazette specifying the limits of the forest
which it is intended to reserve and declaring the same to be reserved from a date to be fixed by such notification
The Forest Settlement Officer shall, before the date so fixed publish such notificati on in the manner prescribed
for the proclamation under sect ion 6. From the date so
fixed, such forest shall be deemed to be reserved forest.
Extinction of ri ghts not claimed 17. Right in respect of which no claim has been
preferred under section 6 shall thereupon be
extinguished, unless, before the publication of such
notification, the person clai ming them has satisfied the
Forest Settlement Officer that he had sufficient cause
for not preferring such claim within the period fixed under section 6; in which ca se the Forest Settlement
Officer shall proceed to dis pose of the claim in the
manner herein before provided.
Power of the Government to redefine the limits of reserved forests in certain cases. 17-A(1) While the description of the limits any reserved forest notified under section 16 is defective or is not
clear in reference to existing facts, the
2Government
may, by 3notification in the 4Official Gazette declare
their intention to redefine the limits of such reserved forests so as to remove the defect or to make the description clear in reference to existing facts. Such
notification shall specify as nearly as possible the corrections which it is proposed to effect to the limits of
the reserved forest.
(2) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1), the District Forest Of ficer shall publish in the
official Gazette of the dist rict concerned and in such
other manner as may be prescribed by rules made in that behalf a notice
(a) specifying the corrections proposed by the notification under sub-section (1); and
(b) stating that any objections which may be made in person or in writing to the District Forest Officer, within a period of 30 days from the date of publication of the notice, will be considered by him.
(3) After the expiry of t he period referred to in clause
(b) of sub-section (2) and after considering the objections, if any, received by him, the District Forest Officer shall submit to the Government the record of
the proceedings held by hi m together with a report
thereon.

(4) The 1Government may, after considering the
report of the District Forest Officer, by notification in
the 2Official Gazette redefine th e limits of the reserved
forest, as proposed by the notification under subsection (1), with such modifica tions as they think fit or
without any modifications.

(5) Save as provided in this section, it shall not be necessary to follow the proc edure laid down in section
to 16 before issuing a notification under sub-section (4).

No right acquired over reserved forest except as here provided 18. No right of any description shall be acquired in or over a reserved forest, except under a grant or contract in writing made by or on behalf of the
Government, or by or on behalf of some person in whom such right, or the pow er to create such right,
was vested when the notification u nder section 16 was
published or by succession from such persons:

Provided that no patta shal l without previous sanction
of the 3Board of Revenue be gr anted on behalf of
Government for any land included within a reserved forest, and every patta granted without such sanction shall be null and void.

Rights continued under section 12 not to be alienated without sanction 19. Notwithstanding anything herein contained no right continued under section 12 shall be alienated by
way of grant, sale, lease, mortage or otherwise without
the sanction of the Government; Provided that, when any such right is continued for the beneficial enjoyment of any land or buildings, it may be sold or otherwise alienated with such land or buildings without such
sanction. Any alienation of such right in contravention
of this section shall be null and void.

No forest produce obtained in exercise of any right continued under section 12 sh all be sold or bartered
except to the extent defi ned by the order recorded
under sections 11 and 12.

Any person selling or bartering any forest produce in contravention of this se ction shall be punished with
fine which may extent to two hundred rupees.

Power to stop ways and water course
in reserved forest 20. The District Forest Offi cer may from time to time,
with the previous sanction of the Government, stop
any public or private way or water-course in a reserved
forest: Provided that a reasonably convenient substitute for the way or water-course so stopped already exists, or has been provided or constructed in
lieu thereof.
Penalties for trespass or damage in reserved forests and acts prohibited in such forests 21. Any person who
(a) makes any fresh clearing prohibited by
(b) sets fire to a rese rved forest, or kindles, or
leaves burning, any fire in such manner as to
endanger the same; or who, in a reserved forest,-
(c) kindles, keeps or carries any fire except at
such season and in such manner as the District Forest
Officer may from time to time notify:
(d) trespasses or pastures cattle, or permits
cattle to trespass;
(e) fells, girdles, marks, lops, tops, uproots or burns any tree, or strips off the bark or leaves from, or
otherwise damages, the same.
(f) quarries st one, burns lime or charcoal, or
collects, subject to any manufacturing process, or removes any forest produce;
(g) clears, cultivates or breaks up any land for cultivation or any other purpose; or
(h) In contravention of any rules made by the
1Government hunts, shoots, fishes, poisons water or
sets traps or snares;
(i) Damages, alters or removes any wall, ditch,
embankment, fence hedge or railing;

shall, in addition to such compensation for damage
done to the forest as the convicting court may direct to be paid, be punished:-

2(1) in any case where any of the acts aforesaid
relates to any scheduled tim ber, with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to twenty-thousand rupees;
Provided that,

(a) for a first offence, the term of such
imprisonment shall not be less than two years and such fine shall not be less than Seven thousand and Five Hundred rupees:
(b) for a second or subsequent offence the term of such imprisonment shall not be less than three years and such fine shall not be less than fifteen thousand rupees;

(2) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term which may extent to six mont hs, or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both"

Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit Acts exempted from prohibition contained in this section
(a) any act done in accordance with any rule made by the Government or with the permission in writing of the District Forest Officer, or of an officer authorized by
him to grant such permission; or
(b) the exercise of any right continued under section 12 or created by gr ant or contract in the
manner described in section 18:
Provided that this section s hall not be held to interfere
with such working of the forest as may be ordered by the District Forest Officer.
Suspension of right in reserved forest 22. Whenever fire is caused willfully or negligently in a reserved forest, the Government may (notwithstanding that a penalty has been inflicted under section 21) direct that in such forest or any portion thereof the exercise of all rights of pas ture or to forest-produce
shall be suspended for such period as it thinks fit.

23. Every person who exercises any right in a
reserved forest or who is permitted to take any forest produce from, or to cut and remove timber or to
pasture cattle in such forests; and Persons bound to assist forest officer and police officer
every village officer or person in any village contiguous
to such forest who is employed by the Government;

shall be bound to furnish without unnecessary delay to
the nearest Forest Officer or Police Station-HouseOfficer any information he may possess respecting the occurrence of a fire in or near such forest or the commission of or intention to commit, any forest offence; and shall assist any Forest Officer or Police Officer demanding his aid-

(a) in extinguishing any fire occurring in such
forest;
(b) in preventing any fi re which may occur in the
vicinity of such forest from spreading to such forest;
(c) in preventing the commission in such forest of
any forest offence; and
(d) when there is reason to believe that any such
offence has been committed in such forest, in discovering and arresting the offender.

Power to declare Forest no longer reserve 24. The Government ma y (***) by notification2 in the
3Official Gazette, direct that from a date to be fixed by
such notification, any forest or any portion thereof
reserved under this Act shall cease to be reserved.

From the date so fixed such forest or portion shall
cease to be reserved; but the rights (if any) which have
been extinguished therein shall not revive in
consequence of such cessation.

Forest reserved previous to the passing of this Act: 25. The "Government may, by notification4 in the
3(Official Gazette) declare any forest which has been
reserved by order of the Government previous to the day on which this Act comes into force to be a reserved forest under this Act:
Provided that if the rights of the Government or of
private persons to or over any land or forest produce in
such forest have not been inquired into, settled and
recorded in manner which the Government thinks sufficient, the same shall be inquired into settled and recorded in the manner provided by this Act for reserved forest, before the date on which the notification declaring the fo rest to be reserved takes
effect.

All questions decided, orders issued and records prepared in connection with th e reservation of such
forest shall be deemed to have been decided, issued
and prepared hereunder, and the provisions of this Act relating to reserved forest. shall apply to such forests.

CHAPTER – III
PROTECTION OF LAND AT THE DISPOSA L OF GOVERNMENT NOT INCLUDED IN
RESERVED FORESTS

Power to
make rules 26. Subject to all rights now legally ve sted in individuals and communities, the
Government may for any district or portion of a district make rules to regulate the
use or the pasturage or of the natural produce of l and at the disposal of
Government and not included in a reserved fo rest. Such rules may with respect to
such land

(a) regulate or prohibit the clearing or breaking up of land for cultivation or other
purposes;

(b) regulate or prohibi t the kindling of fine and prescribe the precautions to be
taken to prevent the spreading of fires;

(c) regulate or prohibit the cutting, sawing, conversion and removal of trees and
timber and the collection and re moval of natural produce;

(d) regulate or prohibit the cutting, sawing, conservation and removal of trees
and timber and the collection and re moval of natural produce;

(e) regulate or prohibit the cutting of grass and pasturing or cattle, and regulate
the payments (if any) to be made for such cutting or pasturing;

(f) regulate or prohibit hunting, shooting, fishing, poi soning water and setting
traps or snares;
(g) regulate the sale or free grant of timber or other natural produce and

(h) prescribe the f ees, royalties or other payments for such timber or other
natural produce, and the manner in which su ch fees, royalties or other payments
shall be levied.

Provided that the 1(Government) may exempt any pers on or class of persons from
the operation of all or any of such rules.

Power to
close land against pasture 27. Whenever fire is caused willfully or negligently in any land to which all or any of the rules made under section 26 have been extended, the Government may,
notwithstanding that a penalty has been inflicted under that section, direct that
such land be closed against pasture fo r such period as it thinks fit:

Penalties 28. Whoever pastures cattle or permits cattle to trespass in land closed under
one month, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.

228-A. Whoever infringes any rules m ade under section 26 shall be punished- Penalties for breach of rules made under section 26.
(1) in any case where such infringement relates to any scheduled timber, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and wit h fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees;

Provided that-

(a) for a first offence, the term of such imprisonment shall not be less than
two years and such fine shall not be less than Seven thousand and Five
hundred rupees;

(b) for second or subsequent off ence, the term of such imprison -ment
shall not be less than three years and such fine shall not be less than
fifteen thousand rupees.

2. In any other case, wit h imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
month, or with fine which may extend to on e month, or with fi ne which may extend
to two hundred rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER – IV
OF THE CONTROL OVER FORESTS AND LANDS NOT AT THE DISPOSAL OF
GOVERNMENT OR IN WHICH GOVERNM ENT HAS A LIMITED INTEREST
29. The 1Government may from time to time by notification in the 2Official
Gazette and in the Official Gazettes of the district affected thereby regulate or
prohibit in any forest wasteland not at the disposal of Government
(a) the breaking up or clearing of land for cultivation;

(b) the pasturing of cattle;
On certain
lands, the breaking up or clearing for cultivation, etc may be regulated for prohibited
(c) the fi ring or clearing of the veget ation; when such regulation
or prohibition appears to be necessa ry for any of the following
purposes:-
First - For protection against storms , winds, rolling stones, floods and
avalanches;

Second - For the preservation of the soil on the ridges and slopes, and in the
valleys of hilly tracts, the prevention of landslips and of the formation of
ravines and torrents and the protection of land against erosion, or the deposit
thereon of sand, st ones or gravel;

Third - For the maintenance of a water-suppl y in springs, rivers and tanks;

Fourth - For the protection of roads , bridges, railways and other lines of
communication;

Fifth - For the preservation of the public health and may alter or cancel such
notification;

The Government may, for any such pur pose, construct at their own expense,
in or upon any such forest or land , such works as they think fit:

Provided that no such notif ication shall be made or work begun until after the
issue of a notice to the owner of such fo rest or land calling upon him to show
cause, within a reasonable period to be sp ecified in such notice, why such
notification should not be made or work constructed, and until his objections
(if any) and any evidence he may produce in support of the same have been
heard by an officer duly appointed in that behalf, and have been considered by the Government.

In case of refusal by owner Govern-ment may take such lands on lease or acquire them. 30. Whenever the owner of such forest or land may decline to comply with
the regulations or directi ons contained in the said no tification, it shall be
incumbent upon the Government, if they resolve to assume control of the said
forest or land, to take the said forest or land, or so much of it as they may see
fit, on lease from the owner for such te rm as they may deem it necessary to
retain the same under control, and the owner shall be bound either to
conclude such lease with the Government or to require that such forest or
land shall be acquired for public purposes, and in the latter event the Government shall acquire such forests or land accordingly. If such lease is
agreed upon, the amount of annual rent to the reserved, and all other
questions arising between the owner or persons claiming to be owners and
the Government shall in case of disput e, be determined in accordance, so far
as may be, with the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1870.
Acquisition of forest or land 31. In any case under this Chapter in which the Government consider that, in
lieu of taking the forest or land under its control, the same should be acquired
under the
Land Acquisition Act for public purposes, the Government may proceed to acquire it in the manner
prescribed by the Land Acquisition Act, 1870.

Protection of
forest at
request of owners 32. The owner of any land, or, if t here be more than one owner thereof, the
owners of shares therein, whether di vided or not, amounting in the aggregate
to at least two-thirds thereof, may, with a view to the formation or conservation
of forests thereon represent in writi ng to the Collector their desire-

(a) that such land be managed on their behalf by the District Forest
Officer, as a reserved forest, on such terms as may be agreed upon; or

(b) that such land be managed subject to the control of the Collector by
a person appointed by themselves and app roved by the Collector; or

(c) that all or any of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder be applied to such land.

The Government may in any such case, by notification in the 2Official
Gazette, apply to such land such provisions of this Act as it thinks suitable to
the circumstances thereof and as may be desired by the applicants.

Any such notification may be altered or cancelled by a like notification.

33. If the Government and any person or persons are jointly interested in a y
forest or waste-land, or in the whole or any part of th e produce thereof, the
Government may either- Management of forests, the joint property of Government
(a) undertake the management of such forest, waste-land or produce,
accounting to such person for hi s interest in the same; or
and other
persons (b) issue such regulations for the management of the forest, wasteland
or produce by the persons so jointly interested as it deems necessary for the management thereof and the interest s of all parties therein.
When the Government undertakes, under clause (a) of this section, the
management of any forest, waste-land or pr oduce, it may, by notification in
the 1Official Gazette and the Official Gazette of the district., declare that any of
the provisions contained in Chapters II and III of this Act sh all apply to such
forest, wasteland or produce, and there upon such pr ovisions shall apply
accordingly.

34.All persons employed under secti ons 30, 32 and 33 to carry out the
provisions of this Act shall be deem ed to be Forest Officers within the
meaning of this Act. Persons employed to carry out the Act to be deemed Forest Officer
2The Government shall also have power to appoint any person to discharge
any function of a Forest Officer under any of the provisions of this Act which
have been extended to any land or to any forest or waste land or produce thereof by a notification under section 32 or sect ion 33 or under any rule
made in pursuance of any provision so extended.
CHAPTER – V
CONTROL OF TIMBER IN TRANSIT
35. The 1Government may make rules to regulat e the transit of all timber or of
certain classes of timber within loca l limits as may appear to be necessary.
Such rules may (among other matters)- Power to make rules to regulate transit of timber
(a) prescribe the routes by which alone timber may be imported into and
exported from the State of Tamil Nadu ;

(b) prohibit the import and export or moving within defined local limits of
timber without a pass from the landholder from whos e lands it was brought, or
from an officer duly authorized to issue the same or otherwise than in
accordance with the conditions of such pass;

(c) prescribe the form of such passes and provide for their issue, product
on and return;

(d) provide for the stoppage, repor ting, examination and marking of timber
in transit within defined local limits or at stations established as hereinafter
provided;

(e) establish, or authorize the Co llector to establish stations to which such
timber shall be taken by t hose in charge of it for ex amination or marking; and
the conditions under which such timber shall be brought to, stored at, and
removed from such station;
(f) provide for the management and control of such stations and for
regulating the appointment and duties of persons employed thereat;
(g) authorize the transport of tim ber, the property of Government across any
land, and provide for the payment of compensation for any damage done by
the transport of such timber:
(h) prohibit the closing up or obs truction of the channel or banks of any river
used for the transit of timber or other forest produce and the throwing of grass,
brushwood, branches and leaves into any such river, or any act which may
cause such river to be closed or obstructed;
(i) provide for the prevention and removal of any obstruction of the channel
or banks of any such river, and for recovering the cost of such prevention or
removal from the person, or by the sale of any timber, causing such obstruction;
(j) provide for the protection of bridges, locks or other public works, by
regulating the flourin g of timber and storing of timber on river banks and by
authorizing the seizure of timber floated or stored in contravent ion of such rules
or by which any damage to such works may have been caused, and the
detention and disposal of such timber until compensation has been made for the
damage done;
(k) regul ate the use of property-marks for ti mber and registration of such
marks; declare the circumstances in wh ich the registration of any property
marks may be refused or cancelled; prescribe the time for which such
registration shall hold good; limit the number of such marks that may be
registered by any one person; and provi de for the levy of fees for such
registration.
(l) Provide for the maintenance of accounts in respect of any scheduled
timber stored in private lands, depots, markets or factories, for industrial or commercial purposes.
135-A Notwithstanding anything in sect ion 35, the Central Government may
make rules to prescribe the route by which alone timber may be imported and
exported across any customs frontier as defined by the Central Government and any rule made under section 35 shall have effect subject to the rules made under this section. Power of Central Government to movements of timber across frontiers
335-B Whoever infringes any rules, in relation to any scheduled timber, made
under section 35 (not being a rule made under clause (a) of that section) shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and
with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees:
Provided that,-
(a) for a first offence, the term of such imprisonment shall not be less than
three years and such fine shall not be less than fifteen thousand and five
hundred rupees;
(b) for a second or subsequent off ence, the term of such imprisonment shall
not be less than three years and such fine shall not be less than fifteen
thousand rupees
Penalties for breach of rules made under 36. The 2Central or, as the case may be, Stat e Government may, by such rules,
prescribe as penalties for the infri ngement thereof imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one month, or fi ne which may extend to two hundred
rupees, or both.
sections 35
and 35A
Without prejudice to the provisions contained in t he preceding paragraph, the
State Government may, in relation to sandalwood, prescribe as penalties, for
the infringement of rule s made under section 35, not being a rule made under
clause (a) of that section, imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year and fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees"
Possession of sandalwood under licence 36-A No person shall have in his posse ssion any quantity of sandalwood in
excess of five kilograms, unless under a licence granted by the District Forest
Officer in that behalf or unless such sand alwood is affixed by a Forest Officer
with such mark and in such manner as may be prescribed.:
Provided that the District Forest Officer may refuse to grant or renew a licence
to any applicant or licensee in respect of whom he is satisfied that by reason of
his conviction of an offence under this Act or the rules thereunder, or the
previous cancellation or suspension of any licence granted thereunder, or the
contravention of any of t he requirements as to the possession of sandalwood, or
for any other reasons which may be prescr ibed, he is not a fit person to whom
a licence should be granted or renewed under this section. Every such order
shall be communicated to the applicant or the licensee, as the case may be, as
soon as possible.
Form and 36-B The Government may ma ke rules to provide for
Conditions of licence (a) the form and manner in which applications for licences may be made;
(b) the terms and conditions wh ich may be included in any licnece and the
fees for the grant of such licence;
(c) the grant of duplicate licences and the r enewal of licences and fees for
the same.
Power to cancel or suspend licence 36-C The District Forest Officer may cancel or suspend any licence granted under this Chapter if it appears to him, after giving the holder there of an
opportunity of being heard, that the licensee has contravened, or failed to
comply with, any of the provisions of th is Act or the rules made there under or
any of the terms or conditions of the licence.
Appeal 36-D Any person aggrieved by the dec ision of the District Forest Officer
refusing to grant or renew or cancel ing or suspending a licence under this
Chapter may, within such time as may be prescribed, appeal to the Collector
and the Collector may make such order in the case as he may think fit.
Penalties 36-E 2Whoever, in contravention of this C hapter or of any ru le made or licence
granted thereunder, possesses sandalw ood, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees:
Provided that-,
(a) for a first offence, the term of such imprisonment shall not be less than
two years and such fine shall not be less than seven thousand and five
hundred rupees;
(b) for a second or subsequent offence, the term of such imprison-ment
shall not be less than three years and such fine shall not be less than fifteen
thousand rupees.
CHAPTER – VI
THE FOREST COURT
Appointment
and constitution of the Forest Court 37. Where no Revenue Officer has been appointed to hear appeals under section
14, 1Government shall, from time to time, as occasion may arise, appoint a Forest
Court to hear such appeals. The court sha ll consist of three members, of whom.
One shall be the Judge of the C ourt of any district in which any portion of the land,
the rights in or over which ar e in dispute, is situated, or the officer presiding in the
principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction of such district;

Another shall be Collector of any such district or an officer of the Revenue
Department of not less than 12 years standing;
And the third member shall be a person specially selected by the 2Government, not
holding an office of profit in t he service of the Government.
The Judge
appointed to be the President 38. The Judge appointed as a member as aforesaid shall be the President of the
said Court, and shall make all such orders in the case as may be necessary prior to
the hearing of the appeal.
The official members of the Court may be appoi nted by name or as holding an office.
Hearing of appeals 39. For the hearing of appeal s, the Forest Court sha ll fix a day and a convenient
place in the neighborhood of the land regarding which, or regarding rights over which,
a dispute exists and shall give no tice thereof to the parties.

All cases before the Forest Court shall be heard and disposed of, so far as may be, in
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure;

Provided that if, on the hearing of any such case, any question of law or of usage
having the force of law, or the construction of a document affecting the merits of the
case, shall arise on which the Court shall entertain reasonable doubts, the Court may,
either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties, draw up a
statement of the case, and s ubmit, it with its own opinion for the opinion of the High
Court.

And it shall be the duty of the Forest Court to make such reference to the High Court
if the questions involve any pr inciple of general importance or affect the rights of a
class.

40. At the conclusion of the inquiry, and after receipt of the order of the High Court
(which shall be binding upon th e Forest Court) upon the refe rence (if any) prescribed
by the preceding section, the Forest Cour t shall proceed to pass such order in the
case as it may consider just and proper; and the order passed by the said Court or by
the majority of the members of the said Court shall be final.

CHAPTER – VI-A
OF THE COLLECTION OF DRFT AND STRANDED TIMBER

Certain kinds of timber
to be deemed property of Government until thereto proved, and may be collected accordingly 40-A (1) All timber found adrift, beached, stranded or sunk, all timber
bearing marks which have not been regi stered under the rules made under
by fire or otherwise, and in such areas as the Government may direct, all
unmarked timber shall be deemed to be the property of Government
unless and until any person establishes his right and title thereto, as
provided in this Chapter.
(2) Such timber may be collected by any Forest Officer or other person
entitled to collect the same by virtue of any rule made under section 40-F
and may be brought to such station as the Forest Officer may from time to
time notify as a station for t he reception of drift timber.

(3) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any class of timber from the provisions of this section and may, in like manner withdraw such exemption.
Notice to claimants of timber collected under section 40-A 40-B Public notice shall, from time to time, be given by the Forest Officer of timber collected under section 40-A. A copy of such notice shall also be
published in the Official Gazette and in th e Official Gazette of the district.
Such notice shall contain a description of the timber, and shall require any
person claiming the same to present to such officer, within a period not less than two months from the date of such notice, a written statement of such claim.
Procedure on claim preferred to such timber 40-C (1) When any such statement is presented as aforesaid, the Forest
Officer may, after making su ch inquiry as he thinks fit, either reject the
claim after recording his r easons for so doing, or deliver the timber to the
claimant.
(2) If such timber is claimed by more than one person, the Forest Officer
may either deliver the same to any such person whom he deems entitled
thereto or may refer the claimants to t he Civil Court , and retain the timber
pending receipt of an order from any such court for its disposal.
(3) Any person whose claim has been rejected under this section may,
within four months from the date of such rejection, in stitute a suit to recover
possession of the timber claimed by him, but no person shall recover any
compensation or costs against the Government, or against any Forest
Officer, on account of such rejection or the detention or removal of any
timber, or the delivery thereof to an y other person under this section.
(4) No such timber shall be subject to process of any Civil, Criminal or Revenue Court until it has been delivered or a suit has been brought, as
provided in this section.
Disposal of unclaimed timber 40-D. If no such statement is present ed aforesaid, or if the claimant omits
to prefer his claims in the manner a nd within the period prescribed by the
notice, issued under section 40-B, or on such claim having been so
preferred by him and having been reject ed, omits to institute a suit to
recover possession of such timber wit hin the further period specified in
or when such timber has been deliver ed to another person under section
40-C, in such other person free from all encumbrances not created by him.
Payments to be made by claimant before timber is delivered to him. 40 E No person shall be entitled to recover possession of any timber
collected or delivered as af oresaid until he has paid to the Forest Officer or
other person entitled to receive it such sum on account thereof as may be
due under any rule made under section 40-F
Power to make rules&prescribe penalties 40-F (1) The Government may, from time to time, make rules to regulate
the following matters, namely
(a) the salving collection and dis posal of all timber mentioned in section
40-A;
(b) the use and registration of boats used in salving and collecting
timber;
(c) the mounts to be paid for saving, collecting, moving, storing and
disposing of such timber;
(d) the use and registration of hammers and other instruments to be
used for marking such timber
(2) The Government may by such rules prescribe, as penalties for the
infringement thereof, impr isonment for a term which may extend to six
months or fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or both.
CHAPTER – VI - B
OF ROYALTIES
Royalties 40-G (1) Trees of the followi ng species that is to say, teak, black wood, ebony and
sandalwood and also ivory a nd teeth of elephants, eith er grown or found on
Government land or private pr operty, are royalties and no tr ade shall be carried on in
them unless they have been duly obt ained from the Government.
(2) The trees mentioned in sub-section (1) shall not be felled by any person without
the written permission of the Chief Conservator of Forests or such other officer as may be authorized by him in writing, but the ow ner of any property on which a teak, black
wood, ebony or sandalwood tree is standing may after obtaining the written permission
of the Chie Conservator of Forests or ot her officer authorized by him as aforesaid,
and on such terms as the Government may determine fell any such tree fro his private use, and when any such tr ee is removed from such property on account of the
Government, the owner shall be entitled to a payment (hereinafter referred to in this Chapter as kudivila) at rates which the Gove rnment may from time to time determine.
Exception :- This section shall not apply to trees in places where royalty in trees has been abolished by Proclamations (Travancore), dated the 11
th January 1936 and the
25th August 1942 )
Notice of proposal to cut and 40-H When it is proposed to cut and remove any royalty trees from private lands by
Government agency, notice in the prescri bed form shall be given to the registered
holder of the land from which the trees ar e proposed to be cut and removed. Such
remove
royalty trees notice may be sent by registered post to t he registered holder of the land and shall
also be pasted in the village and taluk offices.
Joint mahazar to be prepared before removal of the trees 40-I Before any such trees are removed, a joint mahazar shall be prepared in the prescribed form by a Forest Officer not below t he rank of a Forester in conjunction with
the local village officer and whenever possible in the presence of the registered holder
of the land or his authorized ag ent who shall also attest the mahazar. Notice as to
when the trees re proposed to be removed and when the joint mahazar is proposed to be prepared shall be given to the registered holder of the land. Such notice may be
sent by registered post.

Notice calling claims for kudivila 40-J After the preparation of the Joint ma hazar referred to in section 40-I, another
notice in the prescribed form shall be published by pasting in the village and taluk offices and on some conspicuou s part of the land from which the trees re cut, calling
upon all claimants to prefer thei r claims to kudivila within ninety days from the date of
publication of such notice to the Forest officer empowered for the purpose and to
produce all documents and other evidence in support of their claims.
Inquiry by Forest Officer into claims for kudivila 40-K (1) When a claim has been preferred as required by section 40-J the Forest
Officer empowered in that behalf shall inquire in to such claims recording all statements
and the evidence in the manner prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(Central Act V of 1908) in appeal able cases.

(2) When no such claim has been preferred as required in sect ion 40-J the inquiry
shall be conducted ex-parte.
(3) For the purpose of such inquiry the Fo rest Officer aforesaid may exercise all the
powers of Civil Court in the trial of suits.
Award to be made after inquiry 40-L (1) on the completion of the inquiry by the Forest Officer under section 40-K he
shall make an award under his hand of-
(a) the kudivi la which in his opinion shall be allowed, and
(b) the appointment of the kudivila so allowed among a ll the persons interested in
the land of whose claims t here is evidence whether they have appeared before him or
not.
(2) The award shall be filed in the office of the Forest Officer and shall be final except
as hereinafter provided. Notice of the award shall forthwith be given to all the parties
who are interested.
Reference to
Court 40-M (1) Any party to the inquiry who is aggrieved by the awar d may, by written
application to the Forest Officer making such award, require tat the matter be referred
to the District Court, within whose jurisdiction the land is situated, whether his
objection be to the amount of t he kudivila, the person to whom it is payable, or the
appointment of the kudivila, an d the Forest Officer shall refer the application to the
District Court within sixty days of the date of t he application.
(2) The application shall state the grounds on which objection to the award is taken
and shall be made within si xty days of the date of the receipt of the notice of the
award.
(3) If on account of the complicated nature of the claim or for other reason, the Forest Officer is of opinion that a reference has to be made to the District Court he may
himself refer the matter to be decided by the District Court within whose jurisdiction the land is situated.
Forest Officer statement to Court 40-N (1) in making the reference, the Forest Officer shall state, for the information of the District Court, in writing under his hand-
(a) the extent and situation of the land, with part iculars of the trees cut and
removed;
(b) the names of the persons whom he has reason to think are interested in such
land;
(c) the amount of kudivila; and
(d) if the objection be as to t he amount of kudivila the grounds on which it was
determined.
2) To the said statement shall be attached a schedule giving the particulars of the notice served upon, and of the statements in writing made or delivered by, the parties
interested and the evidence adduced by them.
Service of
notice 40-O The District Court shall thereupon cause a notice specifying the day on which the court shall proceed to determine the objection and directing their appearance
before the Court on that day, to be served on the following, namely:-
(a) the applicant,
(b) all persons interested in the inquiry, and
(c) the Government
Scope of the inquiry 40-P The scope of the inqu iry in every such proceeding shall be restricted to a
consideration of the interest s of the persons affected and every such proceeding shall
be taken in open Court.
Form of award by Court 40-Q Every award made by the Court shall be in writing signed by the Judge, and shall specify the amount of the kudivila awarded and the respective persons to whom it shall be payable. Against the award made by the District Court, an appeal shall lie to
the High Court.
Tendering payment 40-R On making an award under section 40-L, the Forest Officer shall tender payment
of the kudivila awarded by him to the pers ons entitled thereto according to the award,
and shall pay it to them, unless they refuse to receive it, or there is any dispute as to
the title to receive the kudivila or an to appointment thereof.
Forest offence to carry out the Court's awards as his own 40-S If the award made by the Forest Office r is reversed or modified either by the
District Court or by the High Court, the Forest Officer shall proce ed to deal with it in
like manner as if it had been in the first instance made by himself.
Bar of claims to kudivila 40-T No claims to kudivila preferred after three years from the da te of publication of
the notice mentioned in section 40-J shall be admitted by the Forest Officer nor shall
any such claims be entertained in court of law except for references under section 40M.
Rules to be
made by
Government 40-U The Government may make rules regul ating or prohibiting the felling, lopping
cutting, maiming, or otherwise maltreating of any tree which is a royalty or any other
tree standing on land temporarily or pe rmanently assigned, the right of the
Government over which has been expressl y reserved in the deed of grant or
assignment of such land.
40-V Whoever-
(a) fells, girdles, lops, marks, mutila tes, or otherwise damages any tree which is a
royalty, in contraventio n of the rules made by the Government, or
(b) fells such trees in places other than those for which he has obtained
permission from a Forest Officer or in quantities larger than or different in kind
from, those so permitted, or Punishment for felling etc, trees which are royalties
(c) is found in possession o such trees, or of any forest produce which is a royalty
without having honestly obtained it, shall, on conviction by a Magistrate, be liable
to imprisonment which may extend to six months, or to fine wh ich may extend to
five hundred rupees, or to both.
(2) In cases where the offence is committed after sunset and before sunrise, or after making preparation for resistance to the execution of any law or any legal
process, or where the offender has been prev iously convicted of a like offence, the
convicting Magistrate may inflict double the penalty prescribed for such offence.
Other provisions
not affected 40-W The provisions of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of,
the other provisions of this Act.
Extension of
Act the Tamil Nadu Wild Eleph ants Preservation Act, 1873 (Tamil Nadu Act I of 1873),
the Tamil Nadu Forest (Validation) Act, 18 82 (Central Act XXI of 1882) and the Wild
Birds and Animals Protection Act, 1912 (Cent ral Act VIII of 1912), as in force
immediately before the date of the commencement of this Act (hereinafter in this
section referred to as the said law) are hereby extended to, and shall be in force in the
transferred territory.
(2) The Game and Fish Protection Act (Tra vancore Act XII of 1089), the TravancoreCochin Forest Act, 1951 (Travancrore-Cochin Act III of 1952) and any other law
corresponding to the said law, in force in the transferred territory immediately before
the date of the commencement of this Act, shall stand repealed on the date of such
commencement.
(3) The repeal by sub-section (2) of the Game and Fish Protection Act (Travancore
Act XII of 1089), the Travancore-Cochin Forest Act, 1951 (Travancrore-Cochin Act III of 1952) and any other law corresponding to the said law, in force in the transferred territory immediately before t he date of the commencement of this Act shall not affect-
(a) the previous operation of any such Act or law or anyt hing duly done or
suffered thereunder;
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred
under any such Act or law; or
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offences
committed against any such Act or law; or
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid;
and any such investigation l egal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act
had not been passed.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), anything done or any action taken, including any appointment made, notification, order, instructi on or direction issued, or
any rule or form framed under any such Ac t or law shall be deemed to have been done
or taken under the said law corresponding thereto and shall continue to have effect accordingly, unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under
the said law.
(5) For the purpose of facilitating the app lication of the said law in the transferred
territory, any court or other authority may c onstrue such law with such alterations not
affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before
the court or other authority.
(6) Any reference in the said law to a law which is not in force in the transferred territory shall, in relation to that terri tory, be construed as a reference to the
corresponding law, if any, in force in that territory.
(7) Any reference in any law which continue s to be in force in the transferred territory
after the date of commencement of this Act, to any Act or law, repealed by sub-section
(2) shall, in relation to that territory, be construed as a reference to the said law
corresponding thereto.
(8) (a) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act or of the said
law as extended to the transferred territory by this Act, the State Government, as
occasion may require, may, by order, do any thing which appears to them necessary
for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
(b) All orders made under clause (a) shall be published in the Offi cial Gazette and,
unless they are expressed to come into force on a particular day, shall come into force on the day on which they are so published.
(c) Every order made under clause (a) shall, as soon as possible, after it is made, be
placed on the table of both. H ouses of the Legisl ature, and if, before the expiry of the
session in which it is so pl aced or the next session, both Houses agree in making any
modification in any such order or both Houses agree that the order should not be
made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be, so however, t hat any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anyth ing previously done under that order.
Explanation - For the purpose of this section, the expre ssion "transferred territory"
shall mean the Kanyakumari dist rict and the Shencottah taluk of the Tirunelveli district.
CHAPTER – VII
PENALTIES AND PROCEDUR E
Seizure of property liable to confiscatio n 41 (1) When there is reason to believe t hat a forest offence has been committed in
respect of any timber or forest produce, such timber or produce, together with all
tools, ropes, chains, beats, vehicles and ca ttle used in committing any such offence,
may be seized by a Forest Officer or Police Officer .
(2) Any Forest Officer or Police Officer may, if he has reason to believe that a
vehicle has been or is being used for th e transport of any sc heduled timber in
respect of which there is reason to believe that a forest offence has been or is being
committed, require the driver or other pers on in charge of such vehicle to stop the
vehicle and cause it remain stationery as long as may reasonably be necessary for
examination of the cont ents in the vehicle and inspection of all records relating to
the scheduled timber and in posse ssion of such driver or other person in charge of
the vehicle or any other person in the vehicle .
Make a report
of such seizur e (3) Every officer seizing any property under this section shall place on such
property or the receptacle (if any) in which it is contained, a mark indicating that the
same has been so seized, and shall as soon as may be ,
(a) where the offence on account of whic h the seizure has been made is in respect
of the scheduled timber which is the proper ty of the Government or in respect of
which the Government have nay interest. To the concerned authorized officer under
(b) in other cases to the Magistrate havi ng jurisdiction to try the offence on account
of which the seizure has been made .
Provided that, when the timber or forest produce with respect to which such offence
is believed to have been committed is the property of the Central or State
Government and the offender is unknown, it shall be sufficient if the officer makes,
as soon as may be, a report of the ci rcumstances to his official superior .
Procedure thereupo n 42(1) Upon the receipt of any such report the Magistrate shall take such measures
as may be necessary for the trial of the accused and the disposal of the property according to law
.
Timber, forest produce, tools etc, which liable to confiscatio n 43. When any person is convicted of a forest offence, all ti mber or forest produce in
respect of which such offence has been committed and all tools, ropes, chains,
boats, vehicles and cattle used in committing su ch offence, shall subject to section
49-G be confiscated to the Government .
Disposal, on conclusion of 44. When the trail of any forest offence is concluded, any timber or forest produce
in respect of which such offence has been commi tted shall, if it is the property of the
trial of forest
offence of produce in respect of which it was committe d Central or State Government or has been confiscated, be taken possession of by or
under the authority of the Distr ict Forest Officer, and in any other case may subject
to section 49-G, be disposed of in such manner as the Court may order .
Procedure when offender is not known or cannot be foun d 45. When the offender is not known or cannot be found the M agistrate if he is of the
opinion that an offence has been committed, subject to section 49 (G) may, on
application in this behalf, order the property in respect of which the offence has been committed to be confiscated and taken posse ssion of by or under the authority of
the District Forest Officer, or to be made over to any person whom the Magistrate
considers to be entitled to the same
:
Provided that no such order shall be made until the expira tion of one month from the
date of seizing such proper ty, or without hearing the per son (if any) claiming any
right hereto, and the evidence (if any) which he may produce in support of the claim .
The Magistrate shall cause a notice of any application under this section to be
served upon any person whom he has reason to believe is interested in the property
seized, or shall publish such notice in any way which he thinks fit .
46(1) Notwithstanding anyth ing herein before contained -
(a) the Magistrate ma y direct the sale of any property seized under Section 41
which is subject to speedy and natural decay; an d Procedure in regard to perishable pro-perty seized under section-4
(b) if, in the opinion of the officer seizing such property, it is not possible to
obtain the orders of the Magistrate under clause (a) in time, such officer may
sell the property himself, remit the sale proceeds into the nearest
Government treasury, and make a r eport of such seizure, sale and
remittance to the Magistrate and thereupon the Magistrate shall take such
measures is may be necessary for the trial of the accused .
(2) The Magistrate may deal with the proceeds of the sale of any property held under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-sect ion (1) in the same manner, as he might
have dealt with the property if it had not been sold
.
Appeal from
orders under section 43, 44 or 4
47. Any person claiming to be interested in property seized under section 41 may,
within one month from the date of any order passed under section 43, 44 or 45 present an appeal there from wh ich may be disposed of in the manner provided by
.
Property when to vest in the Stat e 48. When an order for the confiscation of any property has been passed under
such order has elapsed, and no such appeal has been presented or when on such
order has elapsed, and no such appeal has been presented, or when on such
appeal being presented the Appella te Court confirms such order in respect of the
whole or a portion of such pr operty, such property or por tion as the case may be,
shall vest in the State free from all encumbrances .
Saving of power to release property seize d 49. Nothing hereinbefore c ontained shall be deemed to pr event the District Forest
Officer subject to section 49-G from directi ng at any time the immediate release of
any property seized under se ction 41 and the withdrawal of any charge made in
respect of such property .
49-A Confiscation by Forest Officers in certain cases (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the foregoing provis ions of this Chapter or in any other law for the time
being in force, where a forest offence is believed to have been committed in respect
of any scheduled timber which is the property of the Government, the officer seizing
the property under sub-section (1) of sect ion 41 shall, without any unreasonable
delay, produce it together with all tools, ropes, chains , boats, vehicles and cattle
used in committing such offence, before an offi cer not below the rank of an Assistant
Conservator of Forests authorized by the Go vernment in this behalf, by notification
in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette (h ereinafter referred to as the authorized
officer) .
(2) Where the authorized officer himself seiz es under sub-section (1) of section -41,
any scheduled timber which is the property of the Government or where any such
property is produced before t he authorized officer under sub- section (1) and he is
satisfied that a forest offence has been co mmitted in respect of such property, such
authorized officer may, whether or not a prosecution is instituted for the commission
of such forest offence, order confiscati on of the property so seized together with all
tools, ropes, chains, books, vehicles and cattle used in committing such offence .
(3) (a) Where the authorized offence afte r passing an order or confiscation under
sub-section (2) is of the opinion that it is expedient in the public interest so to do, he
may order the confiscated pr operty or any part thereof to be sold by public auction .
(b) Where any confiscated pr operty is sold as aforesaid, the proceed thereof after
deduction of the expenses of any such auction of other incidental expenses relating
thereto shall, where the order of confiscation made under this section is set aside or
annulled by an order under sect ion 49-C or section 49-D, be paid to the owner
thereof or to the person from whom it was seized as may be specified in such order .
49-B Issue of show cause notic e before confiscation under section
49-A (1) No order confiscating any scheduled timber or tools, ropes, chains, boats,
vehicles or cattle shall be made under sectio n 49-A, except after notice in writing to
the person from whom it is seized info rming him o fine grounds on which it is
proposed to confiscate it and considering his objections if any :
Provided that no order confiscating a motor vehicle shall be made except after giving notice in writing to the register ed owner thereof, if in the opinion the
authorized officer, it is practicable to do so and considering his objection, if any
.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), no or der confiscating any
tool, rope, chain, boat, vehicle or cattle shall be made under section 49-A if the
owner of the tool, rope, chain, boat, vehicle or cattle proves to the satisfaction of the
authorized officer that it was used in carrying scheduled timber without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the person in
charge of the tool, rope, chain but, vehi cle or cattle and that each of them, had
taken all reasonable and necessary precautions against such use
.
(c) Revision - Any Forest Officer not bel ow the rank of Conservator of Forests
specially empowered by the Gove rnment in this behalf, by notification in the Tamil
Nadu Government Gazette may, of his own motion, call for and examine the records
of the authorized officer in respect of any order under secti on 49-A, make such
inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made and pass such orders as he deems fit :
Provided that no revision proceeding shall be initiated by such officer under this
section against any order passed under section 49-A, if the time for appeal against
that order has not expired :
Provided further that no or der prejudicial to any perso n shall be passed under this
section unless such person has been given an opportunity of making his
representation .
49-D Appeal - (1) Any person aggrieved by any order passed under section 49-A
opportunity of being heard to the appellant and the authorized officer or the officer
specially empowered under sect ion 49-C, as the case may be, pass such order as
he may think fit, confirming, modify ing or annulling the order appealed against
.
(2) An order of the Sessions Judge under s ub-section (1) shall be final and shall not
be questioned in any court of law .
49-E Award of confiscation no ban for inf liction of any punishment - The award of
any confiscation under section 49-A or section 49-C or section 49-D shall not prevent the infliction of any punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable
under this Act
.
49-F Property confiscated to vest with Gove rnment - when an order for confiscation
of any property has been passed under section 49-A or section 49-C or section 49-D
and such order has become final in respect of the whole or any portion of such
property, such property or por tion thereof, or if it has been sold under sub-section
(d) of section 49-A, the sale proceeds thereof, as the case may be, shall vest in the
Government free from all circumstances .
49-G Bar of jurisdiction in certain cases - whenever any scheduled timber belong to
the Government or any tool, rope, chain, boat, vehicle, or cattl e, used for committing
any offence in respect of any scheduled tim ber, is seized under section (1) of
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974) or in any other law for the
time being in force -
(a) the authorized officer under section 49- A, or the Forest Officer specially
empowered under section 49-C, or the se ssions Judge hearing an appeal under
(b) any other officer, court, tribunal or authority shall not have, ju risdiction to make
orders with regard to the cust ody, possession, delivery, dis posal or distribution of
such property .
50. Whoever, with intent to cause damage or injury to t he public or to any person,
or to cause wrongful gain as defined in the India Penal Cod e
(a OfficGovpe) knowingly counterfeits upon any timber or standing tree a mark used by Forest
er to indicate that such timbre or tree is the property of the Central or State
ernment or of some person, or that it may lawfully be cut or removed by some
rson; o r
(b) unlawfully affixes to any timber or st anding tree a mark used by Forest Officer; o r
(c) alters defaces or obliterates any su ch mark placed on any timber or standing
tree by or under the authority of a Forest Officer; o r
(d) alters, moves destroys or defaces any boundary mark of any forest or any land
to which any provisions of this Act apply ; Penalty for
counterfeiting
or defacing marks on trees and timber and for altering boundary mark s
shall be punished with imprisonm ent for a term which may ex tend to two years, or
with fine which may extend to on e thousand rupees, or with both .
Power to arrest without warran t 51. Any Forest Officer or Police Officer ma y, without orders from a Magistrate and
without a warrant, arrest any person reasonably suspected of having been
concerned in any forest offence punishab le with imprisonment for one month or
upwards if such person refuses to give his name and residence or gives a name or
residence which there is reason to believe to be false, or if there is reason to believe
he will abscond .
Any person arrested under this section s hall be informed as soon may be of the
grounds for such arrest and shall be produc ed before the nearest Magistrate within
a period of 24 hours of such arrest excludi ng the time necessary for the journey from
the place of arrest to the court of t he Magistrate; and no such person shall be
detained in custody beyond the said period without the authority of a Magistrate ;
Punishment 52. Any Forest Officer or Police Officer who vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes
for seizure
wrongful or arres t any property on pretence of se izing property liable to conf iscation under this Act, or
who vexatiously and unnecessarily arre sts any person shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupee s
Power to prevent commission of offenc e 53. Every Forest Officer and Police Officer s hall prevent and may interfere for the
purpose of preventing the commiss ion of any forest offence .
Operation of other laws not barre d 54. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other la w for any act or omission which constitutes a forest
offence or from being liable under such ot her law to any high er punishment or
penalty than that provided by this Act or the rules made thereund er : Provided that
no person shall be punished t wice for the same offence
.
Power to compound offence s 55 (1) Any Forest Officer specially empowe red in this behalf may accept from any
person reasonable suspected of having committed any forest offence other than an offence under section 50 or section 52 a sum of money by way of compensation for
the offence which may have been committ ed; and where any property has been
seized as liable to confiscation, may rel ease the same on payment of the value
thereof as estimated by such officer
.
(2) on the payment of such sum of money or such value or both as the case may be to such officer the accused person, if in custody, shall be discharged, the property
seized shall be released, and no further proceedings shall be taken against such
person or property.

1(3) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1 ) and (2) shall apply to any offence in
respect of :
(a) any sandalwood, where t he weight of such sandalwood involved in such offence
is more than one hundred kilograms; an d
(b) any scheduled timber (other than s andalwood) where the value of such
scheduled timber involved in such off ence is more than ten thousand years .
Presumption that timber or (56) When in any proceedings taken under th is Act or in consequence of anything
done under this Act a question arises as to whether any forest produce is the
forest
produce belongs to the Central or State Governmen t property of the 2Central or State Government such produce shall be presumed to be
the property of the 1Central or State Government until the contrary is proved .
Punishment for habitual offenc e 56-A1 In respect of any offence relating to any scheduled timber, any timber who is
found by the Magistrate to be habitual offender, such pe rson shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years but which shall not be less
than three years and with fine which ma y extend to twenty thousand rupees but
which shall not be less than fifteen thousand rupees .
Explanation : For the purpose of this se ction, "habitual off ender" means a person,
who before or after the date of publication of the Tam il Nadu Forest (Amendment)
Act, 1979 in the Tamil Nadu
Government Gazette has been sentenced to a substantive term of imprisonment
(such sentence not having been set aside in appeal or revision) for not less than three occasions for any offence relating to any scheduled timber, each of the
subsequent sentence having been passed in res pect of such offence relating to any
scheduled timber committed after the passi ng of the sentence on the previous
occasions
.
56-B The offence in respect of any schedul ed timber shall be non-bail able and the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (C entral Act 2 of 1974) with
respect to non-bail able offences shall apply to those offences .
Certain offences to be non-bailabl e 56-C Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1973
(Central Act 2 of 1974) any offence in re spect of any scheduled timber shall be
deemed to be a cognizable offence within the meaning of that Code .
Offences under the Act to be cognizabl e 56-D Whenever any person is accused of any offence under this Act in respect of
any scheduled timber, it shall be presumed until the contrary is proved that such
person has committed such offence .
Presumption
as to commission of offence in respect of scheduled timbe r 56-E (1) The Government may, by notificat ion, add any timber to or omit any timer
from, the Schedule .
Power to amend schedul e (2) All references made in this Act to the schedule shall be construed as references to the said schedule as for the time being amended in exer cise of the powers
conferred by this section
.
CHAPTER – VIII
CATTLE TRESPASS
Cattle Trespass Act, 1871 to apply 57. Cattle trespassing in a reserved forest, on lands on which the grazing of cattle has been prohibited by rules made under sect ion 26 or which has been closed under
meaning of the eleventh sect ion of the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871, and may be seized
and impounded as such by a Forest Officer or Police Officer.
Power to alter fines fixed by that Act. 58. The Government may by notification in the official Gazette direct that in lieu of the
fines fixed by the 12th section of the Act last aforesaid there shall be levi ed in all or any
of the areas to which this Act applies for each head of cattle impounded under section
of this Act such fines as they think fir but not exceeding the followi ng (that is to say):
Rs.
For each Elephant Rs. 19.00
For each buffalo or camel Rs. 2.00
For each horse mare gelding, pony, colt, filly,
Mule, bull, bullock, cow, calf or heifer Re. 1.00
For each ass, pig, ram, ewe, sheep,
Lamb, goat or kid 50 Paise
CHAPTER – IX
FOREST OFFICERS
59. The 1Government may invest any Forest Of ficer by name, or as holding an
office, with the following g pow ers (that is to say):
(a) the power of a settlement-office r under the Tamilnadu Boundaries Act,
No.XXVIII of 1860):
(b) the powers of a Civil Cour t to compel the attendance of witnesses and
the production of documents;
(c) power to hold inquiries into forest offences, and in the course of such
inquires to receive and record evidence, and to issue search-warrants which may
be executed in the manner provided by the Code of Criminal Procedure;
(d) power to accept compens ation for forest offence under section 55 and
may withdraw and powers so conferred.
Any evidence recorded under clause ( c) of this section shall be admissible in any
subsequent trial before a Magistrate of the alleged off ender : Provided Government
may invest Forest Officers with
certain
power
That it has been taken in the presence of the accused person, and recorded in the manner provided by section 333, section 334 or section 335 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure.
Forest officers deemed public servants 60. All Forest Officers shall be deem ed to be public servants within the meaning
of the Indian Penal Code.
Indemnity for acts done in good faith 61. No suit or criminal prosecution shal l lie against any public servant for anything
done or omitted in good faith under this Act.
62. Omitted.

CHAPTER – X
MISCELLANEOUS
63. The Government may make rules consistent with this Act-
(a) to declare by what Forest O fficer or class of Forest Officers the
powers of duties conferred or imposed by or under this Act on a Forest
Officer shall be exercised or performed;
(b) to regulate the procedure of Forest Settlement Officers;
(c) to regulate there wards to be paid to officers and informers from the
proceeds of fines and confiscations under this Act, or form the public
treasury;
(d) for the preservation reproduc e on and disposal of trees and timber
belonging to the Central or Stat e Government but grown on lands
belonging to or in the occ upation of private persons Additional powers
to made rules
(e) generally to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Rules when to have force of law 64. All rules made by t he Government under this Ac t shall be published in
the Official Gazette and in the Official Gazette of the districts affected
thereby, and shall thereupon have the forc e of law. Such rules may be
cancelled or varied by like notification.

Rules to be placed before the legislative 64-A Every rules made by the Govern ment under this Act shall, as soon
as possible after it is made, be plac ed on the table of both houses of the
Legislature, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed
or the next session, both houses agree in making any modification in any
such rule of both houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be so. however, that any such modification or amendment should be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Power of All powers conferred by this Act on the Government may be exercised
Government
exercisable from time to time from time to time as occasion requires.
Government may delegate powers 65. It shall be lawful fro the Government to de legate any of the powers
conferred by sections 19, 20,22, 27, 58 and 62 to the Board of Revenue or
to such other controlling Revenue-aut hority as the Government may from
time to time appoint.
Recovery of money due to Government 66. All money, other than fines, payable to the Government under this Act, or any rules made there under or account of timber or forest produce or of expense incurred in the execution of this Act in respect of timber or
forest produce or under any contract re lating to timber or forest produce
including any sum recoverable thereunder for the breach thereof or in
consequence of its cancellation of under the terms of a notice relating to
the sale or timber or forest produce by auction or by invitation of tenders,
issued by or under the authority of District Forest Officer and all
compensation awarded to Government under this Act, may, if not paid
when due, be recovered, under the law for the time being in force, as if
were in arrear of land revenue.
Lieu on forest produce for such money 67. When any such money is payable for, or in respect of any forest
produce, the amount thereof shall be deemed to a first charge on such
produce; and if such amount

Be not paid when due, such produce may be taken possession of by or under the authority of the District Forest Officer, and may be retained until
such amount has been paid, or such Forest Officer may sell such produce
by public auction, and t he proceeds of the sale shall be applied first in
discharging such amount.
The surplus (if any), if not claimed within two months from the date of the
sale by the person entitled thereto s hall be forfeited to Government..
Land required under this Act to 68. Whenever it appears to the Government that any land is required for any of the purposes of this Act, such land shall be deemed to be needed
be deemed to be
needed for public purpose under the Land Acquisition Act for a public purpose within the meaning of the Land Acquisition Act, 1870,
Liability of person un-authorisedly occupying any land in reserved forest etc, to summary eviction. 68-A Any person unauthoriz edly occupying any land in reserved forest or
any land at the disposal of Govern ment may be summarily evicted by an
officer of Forest Department not below the rank o f Fore st Ranger or an
Officer of the Revenue Department not bel ow the rank of Tahsildar having
jurisdiction over the ar ea in which such ladn is any crop or her product
raised on scuh land, shall be liable to forfeiture and any building or other
construction erected or anything deposit ed thereon shall also be liable to
forfeiture. Forfeiture under this se ction, shall be adjudged by the officer
referred to above and any property so fo rfeited, shall be disposed of in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(a) such person has been given a notice in such manner may be
prescribed; and
(b) the representation, if any received in pursuance of such notice
has been duly considered by such officer concerned.
TIME SCHEDULE
(See Section 2 and Section 56-E)
Scheduled Timber
(1) Blackwood;
(2) Read sanders (Redsanders incl uded in G.O.Ms,No.945 F&F dated
31.8.87)
(3) Rosewood;
(4) Sandalwood; an d
(5) Teakwood (G.O.344 & 345 E&F department dated 8.8.9 7