An Act to provide for the levy of tax on urban land in the
3{State of Tamil Nadu].
BE it enacted by the Legislature of the *[State of Tamil Nadu]
in the Seventeenth Year of the Republic of India as
follows : -
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Short title and 1. (1) This Act may be called the '[Tamil Nadu]
commencement [Jrhan Land Tax Act, 1966
2. (a) (i) This Act, except sections 19, 47 and
48, shall be deemed to have come into force in the
City of Madras on the 1 day of July 1963 and
sections 19 and 47 shall be deemed to have come into
force in the City of Madras on the 21‘ May 1966.
(ii) Section 48 shall come into force on
the date of the publication of this Act in the *Fort. St.
George Gazette.
! These words were submitted for the word “Madras” by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1969,
1966, Part IV — Section 3, page 92.
This expression was submitted for the expression “State of Madras” by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of
* Now the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
(b) The Government may, by notification,
direct that this Act shall come into force on such date
as may be specified in the notification in -
(i) any of other municipal town ; or
(ii) any township ; or
(iii) any area specified in the notification and
within sixteen kilometers of the City of Madras or
such municipal town or township.
(3) The Government may, by notification,
cancel any notification issued under clause (b) of sub-
section (2) but the cancellation shall not be deemed to
affect the power of the Government under clause (b)
of sub-section (2) again to bring this Act into force in
such municipal town or township or area.
(4) A draft of any notification proposed to be
issued under clause (b) of sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) shall be laid on the table of the Legislative
Assembly and the notification shall not be issued
unless the Assembly approves the draft either without
modification or addition or with modifications or
additions; and upon such approval being given, the
notification shall be issued in the form in which it has
been approved and such notification on being so
issued shall be published in the “Fort St. George
Gazette and shall thereafter be of full force and effect.
'11-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in Exten-
clause (b) of sub-section (2) and sub-section (4) of sionof
force on the ' day of July 1975 in the area comprised City Belt
within sixteen kilometers of the outer limits of the City Area,
of Madras (hereinafter referred to in this Act, as the
Madras City Belt Area):
Provided that for the purpose of determining
the amount or urban land tax under this Act in respect
of such area, the market value as on the ' day of July
shall be the basis:
! This section was inserted by section 2 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Tamil
Nadu Act 49 of 1975)
* Now the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette.
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
Provided further that where any portion of a village lies
within the said sixteen kilometres, the whole of such
village shall be deemed to lie outside the said sixteen
kilometers for the purpose of this Act.]
Definitions 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires -
(1) “assessee” means a person by whom urban
land tax is payable under this Act and includes every
other person in respect of whom any proceeding under
this Act has been taken for the determination of the
urban land tax payable by him ;
(2) “Assistant Commissioner” means the
Assistant Commissioner of Urban Land Tax appointed
under section 3;
(3) “building” includes a house, out-house, stable,
latrine, godown, shed, hut, wall and any other structure,
whether of masonry, bricks, mud, wood, metal or any
other material whatsoever;
(4) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of
Urban Land Tax appointed under section 3;
(5) “date of the commencement of this Act”
means-
(i) in relation to the City of Madras, the first day
of July 1963 ; and
(ii) in relation to any other municipal town or
township or area, the first day of July of the fasli year in
which the notification under clause (b) of sub-section
(2) of section | is published ;
(6) “each urban land” means '[the urban land]
comprised in a survey number or a sub-division number ;
(7) “fash year” means the year commencing on
the first day of July ;
(8) “Government” means the State Government;
°[8-A) “ground” means an area comprising two
hundred and twenty three square metres (two thousand
and four hundred square feet) ;
(8-B) “municipal town” includes the City of
Madurai; ]
! These words were substituted for the words “the land” by section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax
(Amendment) Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975)
These clauses were inserted by section 2 (a) of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971
(Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971).
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
(9) “occupier” includes-
(a) any person for the time being paying or
liable to pay to the owner rent or any portion of the
rent of the urban land or of the building constructed on
the urban land or part of such land or building in
respect of which the word is used or the damages on
account of the occupation of such land, building or
part ; and
(b) a rent — free occupant ;
but does not include any person who is entitled to the
kudiwaram in respect of any inam land but in respect
of which land any other person is entitled to the
melwaram ;
(10) “owner” includes -
(i) any person (including a mortgagee in
possession) for the time being receiving or entitled to
receive, whether on his own account or as agent,
trustee, guardian, manager or receiver for another
person or for any religious or charitable purposes, the
rent or profits of the urban land or of the building
constructed on the urban land in respect of which the
word is used;
(ii) any person who is entitled to the kudiwaram
in respect of any inam land ;
but does not include -
(a) a shrotriemdar ; or
(b) any person who is entitled to the melwaram
in respect of any inam land but in respect of which
land any other person is entitled to the kudiwaram.
Explanation . — For the purposes of clause (9) and
clause (10), inam land includes lakhiraj tenures of
land and shrotriem land ;
'((10-A) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to
this Act ; ]
This clause was inserted by section 2(b) of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971
(Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971).
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
(11) “township” means a township constituted
under the Mettur Township Act, 1940 ('[Tamil Nadu]
Act XI of 1940), the Courtallam Township Act, 1954
([Tamil Nadu Act XVI of 1954), the Bhavanisagar
Township Act, 1954, (‘[Tamil Nadu] Act XXV of
1954) or section 4 of the '[Tamil Nadu] Panchayats
Act, 1958 (‘[Tamil Nadu] Act XXXV of 1958) or any
other township constituted under any other law for the
time being in force ;
(12) “Tribunal” means a Tribunal constituted
under section 4;
°[(12-A) “urban area” means the urban area referred to
in section 6-A;]
(13) “urban land” means any land which is
used or is capable of being used as a building-site and
includes garden or grounds, if any, appurtenant to a
building but does not include any land which is
registered as wet in the revenue accounts of the
Government and used for the cultivation of wet crops.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, any site
on which any building has been constructed shall be
deemed to be urban land ;
(14) “Urban Land Tax Officer” means the
Urban Land Tax Officer appointed under section 3.
Special [2-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
definition (5) of section 2, in this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires, “date of the commencement of this
Act’ in relation to the Madras City Belt Area means
the 1“ day of July 1975;
Provided that for the purpose of determining
the amount of urban land tax under this Act in respect
of such area, the market value as on the ' day of July
shall be the basis. ]
' These words were substituted for the word “Madras” by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1969,
This clause was inserted by section 2 (c) of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971
(Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971).
This Section was inserted by section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975).
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
CHAPTER II
URBAN LAND TAX AUTHORITIES
3. (1) There shall be following clauses of Urban land
urban land Urban land tax authorities for the ‘#* authorities
purposes of this Act, namely : -
(a) the “Board of Revenue;
(b) Commissioner of Urban Land Tax ;
(c) Assistant Commissioners of Urban Land
Tax ;
(d) Urban Land Tax Officer.
(2) (a) The authorities specified in clauses (b)
and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be appointed by
the Government, and the authorities specified in
clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be appointed by
the Commissioner.
(b) The appointment under clause (a) shall
be by notification with jurisdiction over such area
as may be specified in such notification.
(c) The authorities specified in sub-section
(1) shall exercise, discharge and perform such
powers, duties and functions as are assigned to
them by or under this Act.
3. The Government may, by notification,
empower any officers [other than the authorities
specified in sub-section (1)] including officers of
any local authority to exercise such powers,
discharge such duties and perform such functions
under this Act in respect of such classes of persons
or classes of urban land and in such areas, as may
be specified in the notification.
* By virtue of section 10(1) of the Tamil Nadu Board of Revenue Abolition Act, 1980 (Tamil Nadu
Act 36 of 1980), any reference to the Board of Revenue shall be deemed to be a reference to the State
Government.
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
11(3-A) Where in any case the owner holds
urban land within the jurisdiction of more than one
Assistant Commissioner, the Assistant Commissioner
within whose jurisdiction the major extent of urban
land is held, shall be the Assistant Commissioner
having jurisdiction in respect of the entire extent of
the urban land held by the owner in the urban area.
(3-B) Where in any case, the owner holds
equal extent of urban land within the jurisdiction
of more than one Assistant Commissioner, the
Commissioner may suo motu or on application
made by such owner, specify by order as to which
Assistant Commissioner shall have jurisdiction in
respect of the entire extent of urban land held by
such owner in the urban area. ]
(4) The authorities specified in sub-section
(1) and the officers specified in sub-section (3)
shall be deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code
(Central Act XLV of 1860).
(5) All officers and persons employed in the
execution of this Act shall observe and follow the
orders, instructions and directions of the “Board of
Revenue.
Constitution = 4, (1) The Government shall constitute as
of Tribunals many Tribunals as may be necessary for the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Each Tribunal shall consist of one person
only who shall be a Judicial Officer not below the
rank of Subordinate Judge.
**** Judicial Officer not below the rank of
Subordinate Judge the expression an Officer not
below the rank of District Revenue Officer shall be
substituted****
These sub-sections were inserted by section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971
(Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971)
* By virtue of section 10 (1) of the Tamil Nadu Board of Revenue Abolition Act, 1980 (Tamil Nadu Act 36
of 1980), any reference to the Board of Revenue shall be deemed to be a reference to the State Government.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
+ amendment of act 09 may 1997 ***
(3) Each Tribunal shall have such
jurisdiction as the Government may, by
notification, from time to time determine.
CHAPTER III
DETERMINATION OF MARKET VALUE AND ASSESSMENT
OF URBAN LAND TAX
5. Subject to the other provisions contained in Levy of
this Act, there shall be levied and collected for Urban land
every fasli year commencing from the date of tax
commencement of this Act, a tax on each urban
land (hereinafter referred to as the urban land tax)
from the owner of such urban land '[at the rate
specified in the Schedule. ]
°[5-A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Special
this Act, the rate of tax under this Act as amended Pr evisions
by the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) ne
revise
Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971) shall be ye
levied in the City of Madras, with effect from the '
day of July 1971.
(2) For the purpose of determining the
amount of urban land tax under sub-section (1), the
market value as on the 1“ day of July 1963, shall be
the basis.
' These words were substituted for the words “at the rate of 0.4 per centum of the market value of such urban
land” by Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of
1971).
This section was inserted by section 5, ibid.
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(2), for determining the amount of urban land tax
under sub-section (1), the provisions of this Act
shall, as far as may be, apply as they applied to the
determination of the amount of urban land tax
before the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu
Urban Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu
Act 30 of 1971), in the Tamil Nadu Government
Gazette].
Special '(5-B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
provisions this Act, the rate of tax under this Act as amended
regarding by the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) revised rates.
Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973), shall be
levied in the area in which this Act is in force, with
effort from the 1“ day of July 1972.
(2) For the purpose of determining the
amount of urban land tax under sub-section (1), the
market value as on the date of the commencement
of this Act, shall be the basis.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(2) and the other provisions of this Act, for
determining the amount of the urban land tax under
sub-section (1), the provisions of this Act shall, as
far as may be, apply as they applied to the
determination of the amount of urban land tax
before the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu
Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Tamil
Nadu Act 19 of 1973) in the Tamil Nadu
Government Gazette. |
Special [5-C. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
regarding the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, revised rates.
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975), shall be levied in
the area in which this Act is in force (including the
Madras City Belt Area) with effect from the 1“ day of
July 1975.
(2) For the purpose of determining the
This section was inserted by section 2 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972
(Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973).
_ This section was inserted by section 5 of the Tamil Nadu Urban land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975).
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
amount of urban land tax under sub-section (1) in
respect of the areas specified in that sub-section, the
market value as on the 1“ day of July 1971, shall be
the basis.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(2) and the other provisions of this Act, for
determining the amount of the urban land tax under
sub-section (1), the provisions of this Act shall, as
far as may be, apply as they applied to the
determination of the amount of urban land tax
before the ' day of July 1975.]
6. For the purposes of this Act, the market Market
value of any urban land shall be estimated to be the Value of
price which in the opinion of the Assistant urban land
Commissioner, or the Tribunal, as the case may be,
such urban land would have fetched or fetch, if sold
in the open market on the date of the
commencement of this Act.
'T6-A. For the purposes of this Act, the area Urban area
comprising in —
(a) the City of Madras,
(b) the Madras City Belt Area,
(c) any municipal town,
(d) the area within sixteen kilometres of the
outer limits of such municipal town,
(e) any township,
(f) the area within sixteen kilometres of the
outer limits of such township,
shall each constitute a separate urban area and for
the purposes of assessment under this Act, the
extent of urban land held by an owner in one urban
These sections were substituted by section 6 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975) for the following sections, which were inserted by section 6 of the
Tamil Nadu Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971) :-
“6-A. Urban area — For the purposes of this Act, the area comprising —
(a) the City of Madras and the area within sixteen kilometres of such city.;
(b) any municipal town and the area within sixteen kilometres of such municipal town ; and
(c) any township and the area within sixteen kilometres of such township, shall each constitute a separate
urban area and for the purposes of assessment under this Act, the extent of urban land held by an owner in
one urban area shall not be included in the extent of urban land held by him in another urban area.
6-B. Total extent only to fix the rates. — For the purpose of this Act, the total extent of the urban land in an
urban area shall be taken into account for applying the rates specified in the Schedule.”
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
area shall not be included in the extent of urban land
held by him in another urban area.
Total extent 6-B. For the purposes of this Act, -
only to fix the
(i) the total extent of the urban land which is rates
vacant or which is used for residential purposes in
an urban area shall be taken into account for
applying the rates specified in Parts I and III of the
Schedule ;
(ii) the total extent of the urban land used for
non-residential purposes in an urban area shall be
taken into account for applying the rates specified in
Parts II and IV of the Schedule. ]
Owner of 7. Every owner of urban land liable to pay
urban land urban land tax under this Act shall, within a period
liable to submit of one month from the date of the publication of
the '[Tamil Nadu] Urban Land Tax Ordinance,
[![Tamil Nadu] Ordinance 30 of 1966] in the
“Fort St. George Gazette, furnish to the Assistant return.
Commissioner having jurisdiction a return in a
respect of each urban land containing the
following particulars, namely : -
(a) name of the owner of the urban land;
(b) the extent of the urban land,
(c) the name of the division or ward and of
the street, survey number and sub-division number
of the urban land and other particulars of such urban
land, and
(d) the amount which in the opinion of the
owner is the market value of the urban land:
These words were substituted for the words “Madras” by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1969,
* Now the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
'TProvided that in the case of an owner of
urban land in any area in respect of which a
notification under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
section shall be furnished within one month from
the date of the publication of such notification [or
within such further time as the Government may,
by notification, specify].]
[7-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in Owner of
urban land
in the City
Madras liable to pay urban land tax shall, within a of Madras section 7, every owner of urban land in the City of
period of one month from the date of the to submit
publication of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax return
(Amendment) Act,1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of
1971) in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, *[or
within such further time as the Government may, by
notification, specify] furnish to the Assistant
Commissioner having jurisdiction a return in
respect of each urban land containing the following
particulars, namely : -
(a) name of the owner of the urban land ;
This proviso was added by section 7 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971
(Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971).
This expression was inserted by Section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972
(Tamil Nadu 19 of 1973).
This section was inserted by section 8 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971
(Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971).
This expression was inserted by section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972
(Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973).
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
(b) the extent of the urban land in the City of
Madras ; and
(c) the name of the division or ward and of
the street, survey number and sub-division number
of the urban land and other particulars of such urban
land, and the provisions of this Act, shall, as far as
may be, apply in respect of such return as they
apply in respect of the return referred to in section
7]
Owner of '(7-B. Notwithstanding anything contained
urban land to in section 7 and in section 7-A, every owner of
submit return urban land in the area in which this Act is in force
cases. and liable to pay urban land tax shall, within a
period of one month from the date of the
publication of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax
(Amendment) Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 19 of
1973) in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette or
within such further time as the Government may, by
notification, specify, furnish to the Assistant
Commissioner having jurisdiction a return in
respect of each urban land containing the following
particulars, namely : -
(a) name of the owner of the urban land;
(b) the extent of the urban land in the urban
area ; and
(c) the name of the division or ward and of
the street, survey number and sub-division number
of the urban land and other particulars of such urban
land, and the provisions of this Act, shall, as far as
may be, apply in respect of such return as they
apply in respect of the return referred to in section
7]
Owner of [7-C. Notwithstanding anything contained in
urban landto sections 7, 7-A and 7-B, every owner of urban land
Se in the area in which this Act is in force (including
the Madras City Belt Area) and liable to pay urban
land tax shall, within a period of one month from the
date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu
Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Tamil
Nadu Act 49 of 1975) in the Tamil Nadu
! This section was inserted by section 5 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972
(Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973).
This Section was inserted by section 7 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975).
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
Government Gazette or within such further time as
the Government may, by notification, specify,
furnish to the Assistant Commissioner having
jurisdiction a return in respect of each urban land
containing the following particulars, namely : -
(a) name of the owner of the urban land;
(b) the extent of the urban land in the urban
area ; and
(c) the name of the division or ward and of
the street, survey number and sub-division number
of the urban land and other particulars of such urban
land ;
and the provisions of this Act, shall, as far as may be,
apply in respect of such return as they apply in respect
of the return referred to in section 7.]
8. The return made under section 7 shall be Return by
signed and verified - whom to be
signed.
(a) in the case of an individual, by the
individual himself ; where the individual is absent
from India, by the individual concerned or by some
person duly authorized by him in this behalf ; and
where the individual is mentally
incapacitated from attending to his affairs, by his
guardian or by any other person competent to act on
his behalf ;
(b) in the case of a Hindu undivided family,
by the Manager, and, where the Manager is absent
from India or is mentally incapacitated from
attending to his affairs, by any other adult member
of such family ;
(c) in the case of a company, by the principal
officer thereof ;
(d) in the case of a firm, by any partner
thereof, not being a minor ;
(e) in the case of any other association, by
any member of the association or the principal
officer thereof ; and
(f) in the case of any other person, by that
person by some person competent to act on his
behalf.
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
Collection of 9. If any owner of urban land fails to furnish
information the return under section 7, the Assistant
Commissioner may obtain the necessary
information in respect of the particulars specified in
as he thinks fit.
Determi nation 10. (1) Where a return is furnished under
of market value section 7, the Assistant Commissioner shall
by Assistant . . _ examine the return and make such enquiry as he Commissioner
deems fit. If the Assistant Commissioner is satisfied
that the particulars mentioned therein are correct
and complete, he shall, by order in writing,
determine the market value of the urban land and
the amount of urban land tax payable in respect of
such urban land.
(2) (a) Where on examination of the return
and after the enquiry, the Assistant Commissioner
is not satisfied that the particulars mentioned therein
are correct and complete, he shall serve a notice on
the owner either to attend in person at his office on
a date to be specified in the notice or to produce or
cause to be produced on that date any evidence on
which the owner may rely in support of his return.
(b) The Assistant Commissioner, after
hearing such evidence as the owner may produce in
pursuance of the notice under clause (a) and such
other evidence as the Assistant Commissioner may
require on any specified points shall, by order in
writing, determine the market value of the urban
land and the amount of urban land tax payable in
respect of such urban land.
(c) Where the owner has failed to attend or
produce evidence in pursuance of the notice under
clause (a), the Assistant Commissioner shall, on the
basis of the enquiry made under clause (a), by order
in writing, determine the market value of the urban
land the amount or urban land tax payable in respect
of such urban land.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
11.(1) Where the owner of urban land has Procedure
failed to furnish the return under section 7, and the i™¢ase
Assistant Commissioner has obtained the necessary werene
information under section 9 he shall serve a notice gig
on the owner in respect of each urban land
specifying therein-
(a) the extent of the urban land,
(b) the amount which, in the opinion of the
Assistant Commissioner, is the correct market value
of the urban land, and
direct him either to attend in person at his office
on a date to be specified in the notice or to produce or
cause to be produced on that date any evidence on
which the owner may rely.
(2) After hearing such evidence, as the owner
may produce and such other evidence as the
Assistant Commissioner may require on any
specified points, the Assistant Commissioner shall,
by order in writing determine the market value of
the urban land and the amount of urban land tax
payable in respect of such urban land.
(3) Where the owner has failed to attend or
to produce evidence in pursuance of the notice
under sub-section (1), the Assistant Commissioner
shall, on the basis of the information obtained by
him under section 9, by order in writing determine
the market value of the urban land and the amount
of the urban land tax payable in respect of such
urban land.
12. A copy of the order passed under Copy of
such manner as may be prescribed and a copy of the a ihe
i . . s
said order shall also be sent to the Commissioner Commissio
and the Urban Land Tax Officer concerned. ner and
Urban
Land Tax
Officer.
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
Market value '(13. The market value determined under this
to remain in Act with reference to any specified date shall
fe fe . . oree or remain in force for such period as the Government specified period . . co. .
may, from time to time, specify in this behalf and
such period shall commence from such specified
date. |
Notice of 14.(1) After the determination of the market
demand. value and of the amount of the urban land tax under
cause a notice of demand to be served on the
assessee. Such notice shall specify the amount of
the urban land tax payable by the assessee and shall
contain such other particulars as may be prescribed.
The present section was substituted by section 8 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act,
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975)
[ The original section 13 read as follows : -
“13. Duration of urban land tax determined under section 10 or 11, (1) The amount of urban land
tax determined under section 10 or 11, with the modification, if any, made in any appeal under section 20,
shall remain in force, -
(a) for a period of ten years from the 1“ day of July of the fasli year in which the urban land tax is
so determined, or
(b) for a further period not exceeding ten years as the Government may direct.
(2) After the expiration of the period of ten years referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1), the
Government may, and after the expiration of the further period referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1),
the Government shall, direct revision of the urban land tax.
(3) All the provisions of this Act shall, as far as may be, apply to the determination of the urban
land tax in pursuance of a direction under sub-section (2) as they apply to the determination of urban land
tax for the first time after the date of the commencement of this Act.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
(4) For the purposes of revision of the urban land tax
under sub-sections (2) and (3) -
(a) the reference in section 6 of “the date of the
commencement of this Act” shall be construed as a
reference to the lst day of July of the fasli year in
which the direction under the said sub-section (2) is
issued : and
(b) the period of one month referred to in
such direction is issued.”
In the said section 13, for the heading “Duration
of urban land tax determined under section 10 or 11.—°
the heading “Market value to remain in force for ten
years. —’ was substituted by section 9 (i) of the Tamil
Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971, (Tamil
Nadu Act 30 of 1971)
For sub-section (1) of the said section 13, the
following sub-section was substituted by section 9 (ii)
of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act,
(Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971): -
“(1) The market value determined finally
under this Act shall remain in force -
(a) for a period of ten years from the date of
the commencement of this Act, or
(b) for a further period not exceeding ten
years as the Government may direct.”
In sub-section (2), for the words “direct
revision of the Urban Land Tax’, the words “direct
revision of market value” was substituted by section
(ii) of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax
(Amendment) Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of
1971).
For sub-section(3), the following sub-section
was substituted by section 9 (iv) of the Tamil Nadu
Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Tamil
Nadu Act 30 of 1971): -
“(3) All the provisions of this Act shall, as
far as may be, apply to the determination of the
market value in pursuance of a direction under sub-
section (2) as they apply to the determination of the
market value for the first time after the date of the
commencement of this Act.”
In sub-section (4), for the words “revision of
the Urban Land Tax’, the words “ revision of the
market value” were substituted by section 9 (v) of
the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act,
(Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971).]
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
(2) The notice referred to in sub-section (1)
shall call upon the assessee to pay within a period of
fifteen days from the date of service of the notice
the urban land tax specified in the notice.
(3) Where the urban land tax payable by
assessee is not paid before the expiry of the period
specified in the notice, the urban land tax shall be
recovered from the assessee as arrears of land
revenue.
Separate notice 15. In respect of the urban land tax payable
ofdemand for for every fasli year or part thereof there shall be a
each fasli year separate notice of demand, containing the
particulars mentioned in section 14, and it shall be
served on the assessee.
Urban land tax 16. If the Assistant Commissioner has reason
escaping to believe that for any reason any urban land has
assessment
escaped assessment or has been wrongly or
incorrectly assessed for any fasli year, he may,
within such period and after following such
procedure as may be prescribed, proceed to assess
or re-assess such urban land and the provisions of
this Act shall, as far as may be, apply to such
assessment or re-assessment.
Urban land tax 17. The urban land _ tax _ shall
to be first ‘'notwithstanding anything contained in any other
charge on law for the time being in force made by the
Legislature of the State], or any custom, usage or
contract or decree or order of a court or other
authority ?[but subject to any tax or other amount
due to the Central Government under any law in
force] be a first charge upon the urban land and
upon the immovable property, on such urban land
and belonging to the person liable to pay such tax. urban land.
' These words were substituted for the words “notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force” by section 6 (i) of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972
(Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973).
The expression was inserted by section 6 (ii), ibid.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
18. (1) Where the owner of any urban land is Recovery
himself not the occupier thereof and is in default of from _
payment of the urban land tax, such tax may be OCCUPICr of : : urban land
recovered from the occupier of such urban land in jy certain
the manner prescribed. cases.
(2) (a) Any occupier who has paid the urban
land tax under sub-section (1) shall be entitled to
deduct the amount so paid from the amount of rent
or any other sum due from time to time to the owner
or intermediary, if any.
(b) The intermediary shall be entitled to
deduct such amount from the amount of rent or
other sum due from time to time to the owner.
Explanation.- In this section “intermediary” means
any person who not being an owner has an interest
in the urban land, and is entitled, by reason of such
interest, to possession thereof, but has transferred
such possession to others.
19, (1) Whenever the title of any person Obligation
primarily liable to the payment of urban land tax on Ff
any urban land is transferred, the person whose title transferor
is transferred and the person to whom the same is transferee
transferred shall, within three months after the to give
execution of the instrument of transfer or after its notice of
registration, if it be registered, or after the transfer is transfer
effected, if no instrument be executed, give notice
of such transfer to the Urban Land Tax Officer.
(2) In the event of the death of any person
primarily liable as aforesaid, the person to whom
the title of the deceased shall be transferred as heir
or otherwise, shall give notice of such transfer to the
Urban Land Tax Officer within one year from the
death of the deceased.
(3) The notice to be given under this section
shall be in such form as may be prescribed and the
transferee or the person to whom the title passes, as
the case may be, shall, if so required, be bound to
produce before the Urban Land Tax Officer, any
document evidencing such transfer or succession.
(4) Every person who makes a transfer as
aforesaid, without giving such notice to the Urban
Land Tax Officer shall (in addition to any other
liability which he may incur through
such neglect), continue liable for the payment
of the urban land tax assessed on the urban land Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
transferred, until he gives notice or until the transfer
shall have been recorded in the revenue registers,
but nothing in this section shall be held to affect the
liability of the transferee for the payment of the said
tax.
'l(5) Whenever there is change in the
aggregate extent of urban land held by any owner in
any urban area as a result of any transfer effected by
inheritance, sale, purchase, gift, exchange,
surrender, settlement or by any other manner
whatsoever or as a result of partition-
(a) such owner shall furnish to the Assistant
Commissioner having jurisdiction a return in
respect of such urban land containing such
particulars, within such time and in such manner,
as may be prescribed, and the provisions of this Act
shall, as far as may be, apply to such return as if it
were areturn required to be furnished under section
7; and
(b) the Assistant Commissioner shall proceed
to assess or re-assess such urban land for
subsequent fasli years, after following such
procedure as may be prescribed, and the provisions
of this Act, shall, as far as may be, apply to such
assessment or re-assessment. ]
CHAPTER IV
APPEAL
Appeal to the 20. (1) (a) Any assessee objecting to any
Tribunal order passed by the Assistant Commissioner under
een orders section 10 or 11 may appeal to the Tribunal within
Commissioner thirty days from the date of the receipt of the copy
of the order.
(b) Any person denying his liability to be
assessed under this Act may appeal to the Tribunal
within thirty days from the date of the receipt of the
notice of demand relating to the assessment :
Provided that no appeal shall lie under clause
(a) or clause (b) of this sub-section *[unless the
urban land tax levied has been paid] before the
appeal is filed.
This sub-section was added by section 9 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975).
These words were substituted for words “unless the urban land tax has been paid” by section 10, ibid.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
(2) The Commissioner may, if he objects to
any order passed by the Assistant Commissioner
under section 10 or 11, direct the Urban Land Tax
Officer concerned to appeal to the Tribunal against
such order, and such appeal may be filed within
sixty days from the date of the receipt of the copy of
the order by the Commissioner.
(3) The Tribunal may admit an appeal after
the expiry of the period referred to in clause (a) or
clause (b) of sub-section (1) or in sub-section (2), as
the case may be, if it is satisfied that there was
sufficient cause for not presenting it within that
period.
(4) An appeal to the Tribunal under this
section shall be in the prescribed form and shall be
verified in the prescribed manner and shall be
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.
(5) The Tribunal may, after giving both
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard,
pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit and shall
communicate any such orders to the assessee and to
the Commissioner in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(6) Any order passed by the Tribunal under
this section shall be final.
21. (1) Where as a result of any order passed in Refund
appeal or other proceeding under this Act, -
(a) refund of any amount becomes due to the
assessee, such amount shall be refunded to him
without interest ; or
(b) any further amount of tax is due from the
assessee, such amount shall be collected in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Where under any of the provisions of this
Act a refund is due to any person, the Urban Land
Tax Officer may in lieu of payment of the refund set
of the amount to be refunded or any part of that
amount against the sum, if any, remaining payable
under this Act by the person to whom refund is due
after giving an intimation in writing to such person
of the action proposed to be taken under this
section.
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
CHAPTER V
SURVEY OF URBAN LAND
Survey of 22. (1) Any officer specially empowered by
urban land an order in this behalf by the “Board of Revenue
shall carry out survey of all urban lands in the area
specified in such order, or, if such lands have
already been surveyed, carry out re-survey of such
lands for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The survey or re-survey carried out under
sub-section (1) shall, subject to such rules as may be
made by the Government in this behalf, be in
accordance with the principles contained in the
‘Tamil Nadu] Survey and Boundaries Act, 1923
(‘{Tamil Nadu] Act VIII of 1923).
(3) The cost of the survey or re-survey under
this section shall be borne by such persons and to
such extent as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Urban land tax 23. The urban land tax payable under this
tobeinlieuof Act in respect of any urban land shall be in lieu of — and in addition . :
to, certain (i) the ryotwari assessment ;
taxes.
(ii) the assessment levied under the '[Tamil
Nadu] Inams (Assessment) Act, 1956 ('[Tamil
Nadu] Act XL of 1956) or under the Andhra Inams
(Assessment) Act, 1955 (Andhra Act XVII of
1955) ;
(iii) the ground rent ;
(iv) the quit rent ;
(v) any amount due under the Madras City
Land Revenue Act, 1851 (Central Act XII of 1851).
* By virtue of section 10(1) of the Tamil Nadu Board of Revenue Abolition Act, 1980, (Tamil Nadu Act 36
of 1980), any reference to the Board of Revenue shall be deemed to be a reference to the State Government.
' These words were substituted for the word “Madras” by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1969,
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
(vi) such other amount as the Government
may, by special order, specify,
payable in respect of such land; but shall be in
addition to any tax on such land payable under any
other law for the time being in force.
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act or in any other law for the time being in
force, the urban land tax payable under this Act
shall not be taken into account for the purposes of
payment of compensation under -
(a) the '[Tamil Nadu] Estates (Abolition and
Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948 ([Tamil
Nadu] Act XXVI of 1948) ;
(b) the ('[Tamil Nadu]
(Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act,
('[Tamil Nadu] Act 26 of 1963);
(c) the '[Tamil Nadu] holds
(Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act,
[![Tamil Nadu] Act 27 of 1963) ; or
(d) the '[Tamil Nadu]
(Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act,
('[Tamil Nadu] Act 30of 1963).
25. Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Madras City Tenants Protection Act,
1921(¢[Tamil Nadu] Act III of 1922),
or in the '[Tamil Nadu] Buildings (Lease and Rent
Control) Act, 1960 ('[Tamil Nadu] Act 18 of 1960), Inam_ Estates
Lease —
Minor Inams
where in any case the amount of the urban
land tax payable in respect of any land
under this Act is in excess of one half of the
amount of the annual rent payable in respect
of such land or the building thereon under any Urban land
tax not to
be taken
into account
for compen
sation in
certain
cases.
Addition of
urban land
tax to rent
in certain
cases.
! These words were substituted for the word “Madras” by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1969,
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
of the said Acts, the court, authority or officer
empowered to fix the rent under any of the said Act
may, on application from the owner, add to the
annual rent aforesaid, an amount not exceeding the
difference between the urban land tax payable under
this Act and one half of the annual rent aforesaid.
26. | ]
Power of 27. (1) The Government, if satisfied that the
Government to payment or urban land tax in respect of any class of
exempt or urban lands or by any class of persons will cause
reduce urban indue hardship, they may, subject to such rules as
land tax. may be made in this behalf, by order , -
(a) exempt such lands or persons from the
payment of the urban land tax, or
(b) reduce the amount of such urban land tax
whether prospectively or retrospectively.
(2) The Government may at any time cancel
or modify any order issued under sub-section (1)
and upon such cancellation of modification, the
entire amount or urban land tax, or the amount of
urban land tax due under the modified order, as the
case may be, shall be payable in respect of the land
concerned with effect from the fasli year in which
such cancellation or modification is made :
! The following section was omitted by section 11 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act,
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975) : -
“26. Concession in respect of owner occupied buildings. - (1) Where any building is occupied wholly by
the owner for residential purposes only and where such owner makes an application to the Urban Land Tax
Officer, that officer shall, subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf and after satisfying himself
about the facts stated in the application, reduce by twenty-five per centum the amount of urban land tax
payable on the urban land on which the building has been constructed and on the urban land appurtenant to
such building.
(2) The application under sub-section (1) shall be made in such form and within such period as may be
prescribed.”
[In sub-section (1) of the said section for the expression “twenty —five per centum” the expression “fifty per
centum” was earlier substituted by section 7 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972
(Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973.]
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
Provided that no such cancellation or
modification shall be made unless the party likely
to be affected by such cancellation or modification
has had a reasonable opportunity of making his
representations.
28. '[1] Where any land which is registered Conversion
as wet in the revenue accounts of the Government °f agricul-
tural land
and used for cultivation of wet crops is converted as_ , into urban
a building-site after the date of the commencement
of this Act, the owner of such land shall be liable to
pay urban land tax with effect from the fasli year in land.
which such conversion is effected.
'[(2) All the provisions of this Act shall, as
far as may be, apply to the determination of the
urban land tax under sub-section (1) as they apply
to the determination of the urban land tax for the
first time after the date of the commencement of
this Act.
(3) For the purposes of determining the
urban land tax under this section -
(a) the reference in section 6 to “the date of
the commencement of this Act” shall be construed
as a reference to the 1“ day of July of the fasli year
in which such conversion is effected; and
(b) the period of one month referred to in
such conversion is effected. ]
CHAPTER VII
The original section was renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and sub-sections (2) and (3) were inserted
by section 8 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1973 (Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973).
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
Exemption 29. Nothing in this Act shall apply to-
(a) any urban land owned by the State or the
Central Government ;
(b) any urban land owned by -
(i) the Corporation of Madras ;
(ii) a municipal council constituted under the
‘Tamil Nadu] District Municipalities Act, 1920
(‘[Tamil Nadu] Act V of 1920);
(iii) a township committee constituted under the
Mettur Township Act, 1940 ('[Tamil Nadu] Act XI
of 1940) the Courtallam Township Act, 1954
(‘[Tamil Nadu] Act XVI of 1954), the Bhavanisagar
Township Act, 1954 ([Tamil Nadu] ACT XXV of
1954) or section 4 of the ('[Tamil Nadu]
Panchayats Act, 1958 [Tamil Nadu] Act XX XV of
1958) or under any other law for the time being in
force ;
(iv) a panchayat or panchayat union council
constituted under any law for the time being in
force ;
*[(c) any urban land owned by a religious
institution, which is set apart for public worship and
is actually so used, including any urban land owned
by such institution and which is appurtenant thereto
but not including any urban land owned by such
institution and -
(i) which is vacant, or
Gi) in which buildings from which income is
derived have been constructed ; |
' These words were substituted for the word “Madras” by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1969,
This clause was substituted for the following original clause(c) of section 29 by section 12(i) of the
Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975) : -
“(c) any urban land set apart for public worship and is actually so used ;”
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
‘T(d) (i) any urban land on which hospitals
maintained by -
(a)the Government, any local authority or
such other authority specified by the Government in
this behalf, or
(b) by any private institution which is in
receipt of grant either from the Central Government
or from the State Government,
have been constructed and any urban land
appurtenant to such hospitals ; or
(i) any urban land used for purposes directly
connected with such hospitals, but not including
any urban land -
(a) which is vacant, or
(b) in which buildings from which income is
derived have been constructed.
! This clause was substituted for the following original clause(d) of section 29 by section 12 (ii) of the
Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975) :-
“(d) any urban land on which hospitals maintained by the Government, any local authority or such other
authority specified by the Government in this behalf , have been constructed and any urban land appurtenant
to such hospitals;”
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
Explanation .- For the removal of doubts, it
is hereby declared that the urban land on which staff
quarters including nurses quarters or any other
buildings directly connected with the purposes of
the said hospitals have been constructed shall be
deemed to be urban land used for Purposes directly
connected with the said hospitals; ]
(e) any urban land solely used for purposes
connected with the disposal of the dead;
(f) roads or urban lands used for communal
purposes ;
(g) any urban land used for public purposes,
provided that no rent is charged for, or no
remuneration is derived from, such user ;
‘Tdh) any urban land used by schools,
colleges or universities for purposes directly
connected with education, but not including any
urban land owned by such educational institutions
and -
(i) which is vacant, or
Gi) in which buildings from which income is
derived have been constructed.
Explanation 1. — For the purposes of this
clause, schools or colleges shall mean only such
schools or colleges which are educational
institutions recognized either by the Government or
by any university, as the case may be.
! This clause was substituted for the following original clause by section 12 (iii) of the Tamil Nadu Urban
Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975) : -
“ch) any urban land on which any building used for purposes of schools, colleges or universities has
been constructed and any urban land appurtenant to such building and any urban land used for public parks,
public libraries, public museums, or used as play-grounds attached to schools, colleges or universities.”
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
Explanation I. — For the removal of doubts,
it is hereby declared that the urban land on which
schools, colleges or universities or staff quarters or
hostels or other buildings used for the welfare of the
students, have been constructed, or used as
playgrounds attached to such schools, colleges or
universities, shall be deemed to be urban land used
for the purposes directly connected with
education ; |
‘'T@) any urban land used for public parks,
public libraries and public museums; ]
(j) any urban land used —
(i) for charitable purposes of sheltering
destitute persons or animals;
Gi) for orphanages, homes and schools for
the deaf and dumb and for the infirm and diseased ;
(ii) for asylum for the aged and for fallen
women ;
*[(k) subject to the provisions of this section,
any urban land actually used for religious,
charitable or philanthropic purposes by such
religious, charitable or philanthropic institutions, as
the Government may, by notification, specify, but
not including any urban land owned by such
institutions and -
(i) which is vacant, or
Gi) in which buildings from which income is
derived have been constructed; |
(1) any urban land used for the preservation
of ancient monuments.
! This clause was substituted for the following original clause by section 12 (iv) of the Tamil Nadu Urban
Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975) :-
“q) such urban land owned by any school, college or university as the Government may, by
notification, specify;”
This clause was substituted for the following original clause by section 12 (v) of the Tamil Nadu Urban
Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975) : -
“(k) any urban land used by such philanthropic institutions as the Government may, by notification,
specify; ”
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
Exemption '129-A. Nothing in this Act shall apply to
from the levy of any owner, if the aggregate extent of urban land
urban land tax. held by him -
(i) in any urban area in which this Act is in
force (other than the Madras City Belt Area), does
not exceed -
(a) two grounds, if such urban land is vacant
or is used for residential purposes, or
The present section was substituted by section 13 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act,
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975).
The following section 29-A was inserted by section 10 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax
(Amendment) Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971): -
“29-A. Exemption from levy of urban land tax. — Nothing in this Act shall apply to any owner
where the total extent of urban land held by him does not exceed one ground :
Provided that where the total extent of urban land held by any owner during any part of the fasli
year exceeds one ground, but subsequently the extent so held is reduced to one ground or less than one
ground, such owner shall be liable to pay the urban land tax for that fasli year as if there had been no such
reduction.”
[For the said section 29-A, the following sections were substituted by section 10 of the Tamil Nadu
Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973) : -
“29-A. Exemption from the levy of urban land tax. — (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(2), nothing in this Act shall apply to any owner if the aggregate extent of urban land held by him in any
urban area does not exceed two grounds ;
Provided that where the aggregate extent of urban land held by any owner during any part of the
fasli year exceeds two grounds, but subsequently the extent so held is reduced to two grounds or less than
two grounds, such owner shall be liable to pay the urban land tax for that fasli year as if there had been no
such reduction.
(2) Where the aggregate extent of urban land held by any owner in any urban area exceeds two
grounds, nothing in this Act shall apply to an aggregate extent of two grounds having the lowest market
value and the amount of urban land tax shall be determined under this Act in respect of the extent which is in
excess of the said two grounds.
29-B. Submission of return when exemption under section 27 or 29 ceases — (1) (a) Where any
urban land becomes liable for payment of urban land tax by reason of the cancellation or modification of any
exemption granted under section 27; or
Contd.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
(b) half ground, if such urban land is used for
non-residential purposes ;
(i) in the Madras City Belt Area, does not
exceed -
(a) three grounds, if such urban land is
vacant or is used for residential purposes ; or
(b) one ground, if such urban land is used for
non-residential purposes :
Provided that where the aggregate extent of
urban land held by any owner during any part of the
fasli year exceeds the extent mentioned above, but
subsequently if the extent so held is reduced below
the extent above mentioned, such owner shall be
liable to pay the urban land tax for that fasli year, as
if there had been no such reduction. ]
(b) Where in respect of any urban land the exemption under section 29 ceases to apply for any
reason ;
the amount of urban land tax due in respect of the urban land concerned shall be payable with effect
from the fasli year in which the exemption is cancelled or modified, or ceases to apply ; as the case may be,
and accordingly all the provisions of this Act shall, as far as may be, apply to the determination of the urban
land tax in respect of such urban land as they apply to the determination of the urban land tax for the first
time after the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) For the purposes of determining the urban land tax in respect of urban land referred to in sub-
section (1) —
(a) the reference in section 6 to “the date of the commencement of this Act” shall be construed as a
reference to the 1“ day of July of the fasli year in which such exemption is cancelled or modified, or ceases
to apply ; and
(b) the “period of one month” referred to in section 7 shall be computed from the date on which such
exemption is cancelled or modified, or ceases to apply.”
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
Submission of '[29-B. (1) (a) Where any urban land becomes
return when
exemption
under section 27 the cancellation or modification of any exemption or 29 ceases liable for payment of urban land tax by reason of
granted under section 27 ; or
(b) Where in respect of any urban land the
exemption under section 29 ceases to apply for
any reason ;
the amount of urban land tax due in respect of the
urban land concerned shall be payable with effect
from the fasli year in which the exemption is
cancelled or modified, or ceases to apply, as the
case may be, and accordingly all the provisions
of this Act shall, as far as may be, apply to the
determination of the urban land tax in respect of
such urban land as they apply to the
determination of the urban land tax for the first
time after the date of the commencement of this
Act.
(2) For the purposes of determining the
urban land tax in respect of urban land referred to
in sub-section (1) -
(a) the reference in section 6 to “the date
of the commencement of this Act” shall be
construed as areference to the 1“ day of July of
the fasli year in which such exemption is
cancelled or modified, or ceases to apply; and
(b) the “period of one month referred to in
which such exemption is cancelled or modified,
or ceases to apply. ]
This section was substituted by section 10 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972
(Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973).
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
30.(1) The “Board of Revenue may, either Revision by
on its own motion or on application made by the Board of
assessee in this behalf, call for and examine the Revenue.
records of any proceeding under this Act (not
being a proceeding in respect of which an appeal
lies to the Tribunal under section 20) to satisfy
itself as to the regularity of such proceeding or
the correctness, legality or propriety of any
decision or order passed therein and if, in any
case, it appears to the “Board of Revenue, that
any such decision or order should be modified,
annulled reversed or remitted for reconsideration,
it may pass orders accordingly :
Provided that the “Board of Revenue shall
not pass any order under this sub-section in any
case, where the decision or order is sought to be
revised by the “Board of Revenue on its own
motion, if such decision or order had been made
more than three years previously :
Provided further that the “Board of
Revenue shall not pass any order under this section
prejudicial to any party unless he has had a
reasonable opportunity of making his representations.
(2) The “Board of Revenue may stay the
execution of any such decision or order pending
the exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) in
respect thereof.
(3) Every application to the “Board of
Revenue for the exercise of its powers under this
section shall be preferred within three months
from the date on which the order or proceeding to
which the application relates was received by the
applicant :
Provided that the “Board of Revenue may,
in its discretion, allow further time not exceeding
one month for the filing of any such application,
if it is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient
cause for not preferring the application within
the time specified in this sub-section.
* By virtue of section 10(1) of the Tamil Nadu Board of Revenue Abolition Act. 1980 (Tamil Nadu Act 36
of 1980), any reference to the Board of Revenue shall be deemed to be a reference to the State Government.
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
Computation of 31. In computing the period of limitation
period of prescribed for an appeal or revision against any limitation decision or order under this Act the time required
for obtaining the certified copy of the decision or
order shall be excluded.
Power to rectify 32. (1) The Urban Land Tax Officer, or
any vont. th the Assistant Commissioner, or the *Board of
fare of the. * Revenue, or the Tribunal may, at any time within
record three years from the date of any order passed by
him or it rectify any error apparent on the face of
the record :
Provided that no such rectification which
has the effect of enhancing an assessment, shall
be made unless such authority has given notice to
the assessee and has allowed him a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(2) Where such rectification has the effect
of reducing an assessment, the amount due to the
assessee shall be refunded to him.
(3) Where any such rectification has the
effect of enhancing an assessment already made,
the Urban Land Tax Officer shall give the
assessee a revised notice of demand and
thereupon the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder shall apply as if such notice had
been given in the first instance.
Power to take 33. (1) The Tribunal, the “Board of
evidence on Revenue, the Commissioner, the Assistant
oath, etc. Commissioner, or the Urban Land Tax Officer or
any other officer empowered under this Act shall,
for the purposes of this Act, have the same
powers as are vested in a court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908)
when trying a suit in respect of the following
matters, namely : -
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath ;
(b) requiring the discovery and production
of documents ;
* By virtue of section 10(1) of the Tamil Nadu Board of Revenue Abolition Act, 1980 (Tamil Nadu Act 36
of 1980) any reference to the Board of Revenue shall be deemed to be a reference to the State Government.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit ;
(d) issuing commissions for the
examination of witnesses ;
and any proceeding before the Tribunal, the
“Board of Revenue, the Commissioner, the
Assistant Commissioner, the Urban Land Tax
Officer or any other officer empowered under
this Act shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193
and 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of
the Indian Penal Code (Central Act XLV of 1860)
(2) In any case in which an order of
assessment is passed ex parte under this Act, the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(Central Act V of 1908), shall apply in relation to
such order as it applied in relation to a decree
passed ex parte by a coutt.
34. Where, for the purposes of Power to
determining the urban land tax payable by any call for
person, it appears necessary for any authority or iformation
officer referred to in section 3 to obtain any
statement or information from any person, it or
he may serve a notice requiring such person on or
before a date to be therein specified, to furnish a
statement or information on the points specified
in the notice and that person — shall,
notwithstanding anything in any law to the
contrary, be bound to furnish such statement or
information to such authority or officer :
Provided that no legal practitioner shall be
bound to furnish any statement or information
under this section based on any professional
communication made to him otherwise than as
permitted by section 126 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 (Central Act I of 1872)
35. (1) A notice under this Act may be Service of
served on the person therein named, either by tice:
post, or, as if it were summons issued by a court
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central
Act V of 1908).
* By virtue of section 10(1) of the Tamil Nadu Board of Revenue Abolition Act, 1980 (Tamil Nadu Act 36
of 1980), any reference to the Board of Revenue shall be deemed to be a reference to the State Government.
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
(2) Any such notice may, in the case of a
firm or a Hindu undivided family, be addressed
to any member of the firm or to the manager or
any adult member of the family, and in the case
of a company or association of persons, be
addressed to the principal officer thereof.
Power of 36. The Government may issue such
Government to — orders and directions of a general character, as Issue orders and . . directions. they may consider necessary in respect of any
matter relating to the powers and duties of the
“Board of Revenue, the Commissioner, the
Assistant Commissioner, the Urban Land Tax
Officer or any other officer empowered under this
Act. The authority or officer referred to above
shall give effect to all such orders and directions.
Delegation of 37. The Government may, by notification,
powers. direct that any power or function exercisable by
the Government, the “Board of Revenue, the
Commissioner, the Assistant Commissioner, or
Urban Land Tax Officer under this Act or the
rules made thereunder shall, in relation to such
matters and subject to such conditions as may be
specified in such notification, be exercisable also
by such officer or authority subordinate to the
Government as may be specified in such
notification.
Bar of suits in 38. (1) No suit shall lie in any civil court
civil courts to set aside or modify any assessment made under
this Act.
(2) Expect as otherwise provided tin this
Act, the decision of any authority or officer under
this Act shall be final and no civil court shall
have jurisdiction to decide or deal with any
question which by or under this Act is required to
be decided or dealt with by the authorities or
officers under this Act.
Indemnity 39. No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceeding shall lie against the Government,
Tribunal, the “Board of Revenue, the
Commissioner, the Assistant Commissioner,
* By virtue of section 10(1) of the Tamil Nadu Board of Revenue Abolition Act, 1980 (Tamil Nadu Act 36
of 1980), any reference to the Board of Revenue shall be deemed to be a reference to the State Government.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
the Urban Land Tax Officer or any other officer
empowered under this Act for anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance
of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
40. The Commissioner, the Assistant Power to
Commissioner, the Urban Land Tax Officer, or any enter upon
other officer empowered under this Act or any land
person acting under the orders of any such officer,
may enter upon any urban land with such other
officers and persons as he considers necessary and
make a survey and take measurements thereof or do
any other act which he considers necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
'[40-A. (1) If no return is furnished by an owner Penalty
within the period specified in this Act or the rules
made thereunder, or if the return furnished by him
appears to the Assistant Commissioner or the
Tribunal to be incomplete or incorrect, he or it may,
by order in writing, direct the owner to pay in
addition to the amount of urban land tax payable
by him in respect of the urban land concerned, a
penalty not exceeding one half of such amount of
urban land tax. Such penalty shall be payable for
every fasli year commencing from the fasli year in
which the return was due or the incomplete or
incorrect return was furnished and ending with the
fasli year in which the order of penalty is passed :
Provided that no order shall be made under this
sub-section unless the owner concerned is given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) Any sum imposed by way of penalty
under this section shall be recoverable as arrears of
land revenue. ]
41. For the purposes of carrying into effect Certain
the provisions of this Act, the authorities or officers records to be
specified in this Act shall, to the extent necessary, Made use of
make use of the records prepared before the date of for purpose : : of this Act. the commencement of this Act by the Special
Officer for Urban Taxation, the Collector of
Madras and any officer subordinate to them.
42. The Government may, for the purposes of Preparation
the Act, cause to be prepared a book of assessment of book of containing — assessment.
(a) particulars of urban land ;
(b) the name of the assessee ;
(c) the market value of the urban land ;
This section was inserted by section 11 of the Tamil Nadu Urban land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971
(Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971).
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
(d) the amount of urban land tax payable in
respect of the urban land ; and
(e) such other particulars as may be
prescribed.
Power to make 43. (1) The Government may make rules
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for -
(ajall matters expressly required or
allowed by the this Act to be prescribed;
(b) the procedure to be followed by the
Tribunal under this Act ;
(c) the form of appeal and application for
revision under this Act ;
(d) the procedure to be followed by the
“Board of Revenue when exercising the powers
of revision under this Act ;
(e) the fees payable in respect of
applications and appeals under this Act ;
(f) the manner of rounding of the total
amount of tax due from an assessee.
Classification of ‘44. Notwithstanding anything contained
land used for in this Act, for purposes of this Act, in the case of
both residential any urban land which is used for both residential
nd non — . . ane ne and non-residential purposes,-
residential _. . . . ,
(i) in any urban area in which this Act is in
force (other than the Madras City Belt Area),
where the extent used for non-residential purposes.
purposes does not exceed half ground, and
* By virtue of section 10(1) of the Tamil Nadu Board of Revenue Abolition Act, 1980 (Tamil Nadu Act 36
of 1980), any reference to the Board of Revenue shall be deemed to be a reference to the State Government.
The present section was inserted by section 44 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1975
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975). The following section was omitted by section 11 of the Tamil Nadu Urban
Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973) : -
“44. Power to remove difficulties. — If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Government may, as occasion may require, by order do anything which appears to them necessary
for the purpose of removing the difficulty.”
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
(ii) in the Madras City Belt Area, where
the extent used for non-residential purposes does
not exceed one ground,
the urban land shall be deemed to be used for
residential purposes. ]
45.(1) All rules made under this Act ? []
shall be published in the *Fort St. George
Gazette, and, unless they are expressed to come
into force on a particular day, shall come into
force on the day, on which they are so published.
(2) Every rule made under this Act°[]
shall, as soon as possible after it is made, be
placed on the table of both Houses of the
Legislature, and if, before the expiry of the
session in which it is so placed or the next
session, both Houses agree in making any
modification in any such rule *[ ] or both Houses
are that the rule “[ ] should not be made, the rule
[ ] shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be, so however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that
rule *[ ].
46. The Madras Urban Land Tax Act, 1963
(Madras Act 34 of 1963), is hereby repealed.
47. The amount of urban land tax already
collected under the Madras Urban Land Tax Act,
(Madras Act 34 of 1963), shall be deemed
to be the urban land tax provisionally paid by
the assessee concerned in respect of the fasli year
for which it was paid and shall remain as security
with the Government pending assessment of
the urban land tax due from such assessee in Rules! [**] to
be placed
before the
Legislature.
Repeal of
Madras Act
of 1963.
Amount paid
under Madras
Act 34 of 1963
deemed to be
amount of
urban land tax
provisionally
paid.
1. The words “ and orders” were omitted by section 12 (i) of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment)Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act
of 1973).
2. The words “and all orders made under section 44” were omitted by section 12 (ii) ibid.
3. The words “and every order made under section 44” were omitted by section 12(iii) (a), ibid.
4.The words “or order” were omitted section 12 (iii)(b), ibid.
* Now the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette.
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
accordance with the provisions of this Act. Upon
such assessment, the said amount shall be
adjusted towards the urban land tax due from him
on such urban land and if the tax on such
assessment -
(i) is in excess of the amount of urban land
tax already collected from such person, such
excess shall be recovered from him ; or
(it) is less than the amount of urban land
tax already collected from such person, the
difference shall be refunded to him.
Repeal of 48.11) The Madras Urban Land Tax
Madras Ordinance, 1966 (Madras Ordinance 3 of 1966) is
Ordinance 3 of hereby repealed.
1966.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything
done or any action taken under the said
Ordinance including any notification issued, rules
and appointments made and returns furnished
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under
this Act.
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
' [THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 5.)
A. Urban land in any urban area in which this Act is in
force (other than the Madras City Belt Area)
PARTI
Urban land which is vacant or is used for residential purposes.
Extent of urban land
()
Where the aggregate extent of urban land
held by the owner in the urban area -
(i) is two grounds or less Lees
(ii) exceeds two grounds but does not
exceed five grounds.
(iii) exceeds five grounds but does not
exceed ten grounds.
(iv) exceeds ten grounds but does not
exceed twenty grounds .
(v) exceeds twenty grounds Rate of tax
(2)
Nil
0.7 per centum of the market
value on the extent in excess of
two grounds which have the
lowest market value.
1.0 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
2.0 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
2.5 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
1The present Schedule was substituted by section 15 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act,
(Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1975). The original Schedule which was added by section 12 of the Tamil Nadu
Urban land Tax Amendment) Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1971), read as follows : -
“THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 5.)
Extent of urban land Rate of tax
(2)
0.5 per centum of the market
value of each urban land ;
0.7 per centum of the market
value of each urban land ; (1)
Where the total extent of urban land held by the
owner -
(i) Exceeds one ground but does not
exceed two grounds
(ii) exceeds two grounds but does not
exceed five grounds.
(iii) exceeds five grounds but does not
exceed ten grounds.
(iv) exceeds ten grounds 0.8 per centum of the market
value of each urban land ;
1.0 per centum of the market
value of each urban land.”
Contd.
Urban Land Tax [1966 : T.N. Act 12]
PART II
Urban land used for non-residential purposes.
Extent of urban land Rate of tax
(D (2)
Where the aggregate extent of urban land held by
the owner in the urban area -
(i) is half ground or less Lees Nil
(ii) exceeds half ground but does not 0.5 per centum of the market
exceed two grounds value on the whole extent
(iii) exceeds two grounds but does not 1.0 per centum of the market
exceed five grounds value on the whole extent
(iv) exceeds five grounds but does not 1.5 per centum of the market
exceed ten grounds value on the whole extent
(v) exceeds ten grounds but does not 2.0 per centum of the market
exceed twenty grounds value on the whole extent
(vi) exceeds twenty grounds Lees 2.5 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent

[The said Schedule was substituted by section 13 of the Tamil Nadu Urban
Land Tax (Amendment), Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 1973) which reads as
follows :-
“THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 5.)
Extent of urban land Rate of tax
(D (2)
Where the aggregate extent of urban land
held by the owner in any urban area -
(i) is two grounds or less Lees Nil
(ii) exceeds two grounds but does not 0.7 per centum of the market
exceeds five grounds value on the extent in excess of
two grounds
(iii) exceeds five grounds but does not 0.8 per centum of the market
exceed ten grounds value on the extent in excess of
two grounds
(iv) exceeds ten grounds Leas 1.0 per centum of the market
value on the extent in excess of
two grounds.”
[1966 : T.N. Act 12] Urban Land Tax
B. Urban Land in the Madras City Belt Area
PART III
Urban land which is vacant or is used for residential purposes
Extent of urban land
(1)
Where the aggregate extent of urban land
held by the owner in the urban area -
(i) is three grounds or less Lone
(ii) exceeds three grounds but does not
exceed seven grounds
(iii) exceeds seven grounds __ but does not
exceed ten grounds
(iv) exceeds ten grounds but does not
exceed twenty grounds
(v) exceeds twenty grounds
PART IV Rate of tax
(2)
Nil
0.7 per centum of the market
value on the extent in excess of
three grounds which have the
lowest market value.
1.0 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
2.0 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
2.5 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
Urban land used for non-residential purposes
Extent of urban land
(D
Where the aggregate extent of urban land
held by the owner in the urban area -
(i) is one ground or less.
(ii) exceeds one ground but does not
exceed two grounds.
(iii) exceeds two grounds but does not
exceed seven grounds.
(iv) exceeds seven grounds but does not
exceed ten grounds.
(v) exceeds ten grounds but does not
exceed twenty grounds.
(vi) exceeds twenty grounds Rate of tax
(2)
Nil
0.5 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
1.0 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
1.5 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
2.0 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
2.5 per centum of the market
value on the whole extent.
[1971 : T.N. Act 30] Urban Land Tax (Amendment)
TAMIL NADU ACT NO. 30 OF .
THE TAMIL NADU URBAN LAND TAX
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 1971.
[Received the assent of the President on the
22” October 1971, first published in
the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette
Extraordinary on the 26'" October
(Kartika 4, 1893).]
An Act to amend the Tamil Nadu Urban
Land Tax Act, 1966.
BE it enacted by the Legislature of the
State of Tamil Nadu in the Twenty —Second
Year of the Republic of India as follows : -
1. This Act may be called the Tamil Short title
Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act,

2.12. [The amendments made
by these sections have already been
incorporated in the principal Act,
namely the Tamil Nadu Urban Land
Tax Act, 1966 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of
1966). ]
13. The provisions of this Act shall Act to over ride
have effect notwithstanding anything ‘he provisions of
contained in the principal Act. the principal Act.
10" July 1971, Part IV — Section 3, page 490.
Urban Land Tax (Amendment) [1973 : T.N. Act 19]
TAMIL NADU ACT NO. 19 OF .
THE TAMIL NADU URBAN LAND TAX
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 1972
[Received the assent of the President on the
June 1973, first published in the
Tamil Nadu Government Gazette
Extraordinary on the 6"June 1973
[Vaikasi 24, Piramathisa (2004 —
TiruvalluvarAndu)|.]
An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu
Urban Land Tax Act, 1966.
BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State
of Tamil Nadu in the Twenty — third Year of
the Republic of India as follows : -
Short title and 1.(1)This Act may be called the
commencement Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax
(Amendment) Act, 1972.
(2) It shall be deemed to have
come into force on the 1“ July 1972.
2.13. [The amendments made by
these sections have already been
incorporated in the principal Act,
namely, the Tamil Nadu Urban Land
Tax Act, 1966 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of
1966). ]
Act to over - 14.The provisions of this Act
ride the shall have effect not-withstanding
provisions of : : : Sd anything contained in the principal the principal yen P P Act. Act.
December 1972, Part IV — Section 3, pages 551-552.
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY = 329
The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislature received the assent of the
President on the 12 August 1986 and is hereby published for general information:-

An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax Act, 1966.
BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Thirty —seventh
Year of the Republic of India as follows : -
1. Short title.— This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax
(Amendment) Act, 1986,
2. Amendment of Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966. In the Tamil Nadu Urban
Land Tax Act, 1966 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966) (hereinafter referred to as the
Principal Act), for the words “Board of Revenue” wherever they occur, the words
“Commissioner of Land Reforms” shall be substituted.
3. Amendment of section 2, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966. — In section 2 of
the principal Act, in clause (4), for the word “Commissioner” in two places where it
occurs, the word “Director” shall be substituted.
4. Amendment of section 3, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966. — In section 3 of
the principal Act, —
(1) in sub-section (1), in clause (b), for the word “Commissioner”, the word
“Director” shall be substituted.
(2) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the word “Commissioner”, the word
“Director” shall be substituted.
(3) in sub-section (3-B), for the words “the Commissioner’, the word “the
Director” shall be substituted.
5. Amendment of section 12, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966. — In section 12
of the principal Act (including the heading), for the word “Commissioner” in two
places where it occurs, the word “Director” shall be substituted.
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY
6. Amendment of section 20, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966. — In section 20
of the Principal Act, -
(1) in sub-section (2), for the words “the Commissioner” in two places
where they occur, the words “the Director” shall be substituted ;
(2) in sub-section (5), for the word “Commissioner”, the word “Director”
shall be substituted.
7. Amendment of section 30, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966. — In section 30
of the principal Act, -
(1) for the word “its” wherever it occurs, the word “his” shall be
substituted ;
(2) (a) in sub-section (1).-
(i) for the word “itself”, the word “himself” shall be substituted;
(ii) forthe words “it may pass’, the words, “he may pass” shall be
substituted ;
(b) in sub-section (3), in the proviso, for the words “if it is
satisfied’’, the words “if he is satisfied” shall be substituted.
8. Amendment of section 33, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966. — In section 33
of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “the Commissioner” in two
places where they occur, the words the “the Director” shall be substituted.
9. Amendment of section 36, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966. — In section 36
of the principal Act, for the words “the Commissioner’, the words “the Director”
shall be substituted.
10. Amendment of section 37, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966. — In section 37
of the principal Act, for the words “the Commissioner”, the words “the Director”
shall be substituted.
11. Amendment of section 39, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966.- In section 39
of the principal Act for the words “the Commissioner”, the words “the Director”
shall be substituted.
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY = 331
12. Amendment of section 40, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1966.- In Section 40
of the principal Act, for the words “the Commissioner’, the words “the Director”
shall be substituted.
13. Construction of references. — In the application of any rule, by law,
regulation, notification, form or order made or issued under the principal Act, any
reference to the Board of Revenue and Commissioner of Urban Land Tax shall,
unless the context otherwise requires, be deemed to be a reference to the
Commissioner of Land Reforms and Director of Urban Land Tax, respectively.
(By order of the Governor)
S. VADIVELU,
Commissioner and Secretary to Government
Law Department.
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY — 333
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU Registered No: M1
Price : 30 paise

TAMIL NADU
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE
EXTRAORDINARY PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

[No.35] MADRAS, MONDAY, JANUARY 20, 1992
THAI 6, PIRAJORPATHI, THIRUVALLUVAR AANDU -2023
Tamil Nadu
Act 12 of
Part IV - Section 2
Tamil Nadu Acts and Ordinances
The following Act of the Tamil Nadu
Legislative Assembly received the assent of the
President on the 14" January 1992 and is hereby
published for general information : -

An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Urban
Land Tax Act, 1966.
BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Tamil Nadu in the Forty — second year of
the Republic of India as follows : -
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Short title and
Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1991. commencement
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into
force on the day of July 1991.
2. After section 1-A of the Tamil Nadu Insertion of new
Urban Land Tax Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to section1-B
as the principal Act), the following section shall be
inserted, namely: -
“1-B. Extension of the Act to scheduled
areas. — Notwithstanding anything contained in
clause (b) of sub-section (2) and sub-section (4) of
into force on the 1“ day of July 1991 in the areas
specified in the Second Schedule (hereafter
referred to in this Act as the scheduled areas) and
for the purpose of determining the amount of
urban land tax under this Act in respect of such
areas, the market value as on the 1“ day of July
1981, shall be the basis.”
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY
Insertion of new
Amendment of
sections 5 and
6-B
Insertion of new
Insertion of new
shall be inserted’ namely : -
“2-B. Special definition— Notwithstanding anything contained in
clause (5) of section 2 and section 2-A, in this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires, for the purpose of determining the amount of urban
land tax under this Act for the fasli year commencing from the day of
July 1991 and for the subsequent fasli years, ‘date of the commencement
of this Act’ in relation to the areas in which this Act is in force (including
the scheduled areas), means the day of July 1991and for the purpose of
determining the amount of urban land tax under this Act in respect of such
areas, the market value as on the day of July 1981 shall be the basis.”
4. In sections 5 and 6-B of the principal Act, for the expression
“the Schedule” wherever it occurs, the expression “the First Schedule”
shall be substituted.
5. After section 5-C of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted namely : -
“5-D. Special provisions regarding market value. — (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the urban land tax under
Act, 1991, shall be levied in the areas in which this Act, is in force
(including the scheduled areas) with effect on and from the day of July
1991.
(2) For the purpose of determining the amount of urban land tax
under sub-section (1) in respect of the areas specified in that sub-section,
the market value as on the day of July 1981, shall be the basis.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and the other
provisions of this Act, for determining the amount of the urban land tax
under sub-section (1), the provisions of this Act shall, as far as may be,
apply as they applied to the determination of the amount of urban land tax
before the 1“ day of July 1991.”
6. After section 7-C of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely: -
“7-D. Owner of urban land to submit fresh return.- Notwithstanding
anything contained in sections 7, 7-A,7-B and 7-C, every owner of urban
land in the areas in which this Act is in force (including the schedule
areas) and liable to pay urban land tax, shall, within a period of one month
from the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land Tax
(Amendment) Act, 1991, in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette or within
such further time as the Government may, by notification, specify, furnish
to the Assistant Commissioner having jurisdiction, a return in respect of
each urban land containing the following particulars, namely : -
(a) name of the owner of the urban land;
(b) the extent of the urban land in the urban area ;
(c) the name of the division or ward and of the street, survey
number and sub-division number of the urban land and other particulars of
such urban land ; and
(d) the amount which in the opinion of the owner is the market
value of the urban land,
and the provisions of this Act shall, as far as may be, apply in respect of
such return as they apply in respect of the return referred to in section 7.”
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY = 335
7. The Schedule to the principal Act shall Amendment of
be renumbered as “THE FIRST SCHEDULE” and _ Schedule
after THE FIRST SCHEDULE as so renumbered,
the following Schedule shall be added, namely:-
“THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
(See section 1-B)
MUNICIPALITIES : oe PN DMN FW nN S
11. Erode
Pollachi
Thanjavur
Tiruppur
Tuticorin
Vellore
Uthagamandalam
Dindigul
Karur
Nagarcoil
Kumbakonam
TOWNSHIPS :
1.Kodaikanal
2.Mettur”. 12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21. Cuddalore
Pudukkotai
Kancheepuram
Villupuram
Myladuthurai
Udumalpet
Palani
Karaikudi
Rajapalayam
Namakkal
(By order of the Governor)
P. JEYASINGH PETER,
Secretary to Government, Law Department.

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE DIRECTOR OF STATIONERY AND PRINTING, MADRAS.
ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY
Short title and
commence-
ment
Amendment
of section 4
Amendment
of section 20
Amendment
of section 30 The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative
Assembly received the assent of the Governor on
the 9" May 1997 and is hereby published for
general information :-

An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Urban
Land Tax Act 1966
BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Tamil Nadu in the forty eighth Year of
the Republic of India as follows : -
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tamil
Nadu Urban Land Tax (Amendment) Act, 1997.
(2) It shall come into force on such date
as the State Government may, by notification,
appoint.
2. In section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Urban
Land Tax Act, (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), (2), 1966, in sub-section for the
expression “a Judicial Officer not below the rank
of Subordinate Judge”, the expression “an Officer
not below the rank of District Revenue Officer”,
shall be substituted.
3. In section 20 of the principal Act, sub-
section (6) shall be omitted
4. In section 30 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), the expression “(not being a
proceeding in respect of which an appeal lies to
the Tribunal under section 20)” shall be omitted.
(By order of the Governor) Tamil Nadu Act
of 1966
A.K. RAJAN
Secretary to Government
Law Department.