An Act to provide for the declaration of certain highways to be State highways,
restriction of ribbon development along such h ighway s, prevention and removal of
encroachment thereon, construction, maintena nce and development of highways,
and levy of betterment charges and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest t o statutorily declare the State
highways and to create Highways authorit ies for the purpose of construc tion,
maintenance or development o f such highways;

BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty second Year of the Republic of India as follows: --

CHAPTER I.

PRELIMINAR Y.

1. (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Highways Act, 2001.

(2) It extend s to the w hole of the State of Tamil Nadu.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification,
appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
for different areas in the State.

2. In this Act, unless the context other wise requires, -
(1) "animal" means any domestic or captive animal;
(2) "betterment charges" means the charges levied under section 34;
(3) "building" incl udes-
(a) any erection of whatever material and in whatsoever manner
const ructed (including a farm building for agricultural purposes) and also
includes plinths, doorsteps, wall (including compound walls and fences) and
the like, or
(b) any structure on wheels or simply resting on the ground without
foundation, or
(c) any tent, awning, pandal or any other structure used for human
habitation or used for keeping vehicles or animals or storing any article or
goods;
(4) "building line" means the line on either side of any highway or part of s uch
highway, as may be fixed under section 8;
(5) "Collector" means the Collector of a district and includes any officer
specifically appointed by the Go vernment to perform the functions of the Collector
under this Act;
(6) "control line" means a line on either side of a highway or part of such
highway, as may be fixed under section 8;
(7) "division" means the area declared by the Government under section 4;
(8) "encroachment" means any unauthorised occupation of any highway or
land where the construction of a highway is undertaken or proposed to be undertaken
or part thereof, and in cludes any unauthorized -
(a) erection of a building or any other structure, balcony, porch or
projection on or over or overhanging the highway or part thereof; or
(b) occupation of such highway or such land, after the expiry of the
period for which permission was granted for any temporary use under this Act; or
(c) excavation or embankments of any sort made or extended on
such highways or part thereof or underneath such highway or part thereof ;

Short title ,
extent and
commence -
ment.

Definitions.

(9) “erection" in relation to building, includes the construction,
extension, alteration or re -erection of any structure or building;

(10) "excavation" in relatio n to any l and, does not include any work which
does not pierce the surface of that land but includes well and tanks;

(11) "Government" means the State Government;

(12) "highway" means any road, way or land which is declared to be a
highway under section 3 and incl udes--
(a) all land appurtenant thereto, whether demarcated or not;
(b) the slope, berm, burrow pits, foot paths , pavement, whether
surfaced or unsurfaced;
(e) all bridg es, culverts, causeways, carriage ways or other structures
built on or across such road or way;
(d) the foot -way attached to any road, public bridge or causeway;
(e) the drains attached to any such street, publ ic bridge or causeway
and the land, whether covered or not by any pavement, varanda or
other structure, which lies on either side of t he roadway up to the
boundaries of the adjacent property, whether that property is
private or property belonging to the Central Government or any
State Government; and
(f) all fenc es, trees, posts and boundaries, hectometer and kilometer
stones and other highway accessories and materials stacked on
such road or public bri dge or causeway,

but does not include a National Highway declared as such by or
under the National Highways Act, 1956.
(13) "Highways authority" means the officer appointed under sub -section
(2) of section 5;
(14) "highway boundary" means the highway boundary as may be fixed
under section 8;

(15)"land" includes benefits to arise out of land and things attached to the
earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth;

(16)"local authority" means -
(i) any Municipal Corporation established under any law for the time
being inforce; or '

(ii) any Municipal Council constituted under the Tamil Nadu District
Municipalities Act, 1920; or

(iii) any District Panchayat or any Panchayat Union Council or any Village
Panchayat constituted under the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994;

(17) "means of access" includes any means of access whether private or public
intended for vehicles or ped estrian and includes any street, road, square, court, alley,
passage, thorough fare or ri ding-path;

(18) "middle of a highway" means the point half way between the boundaries
of the highway in relation to any highway for the impr ovement of which plans have
been prepared by the Highways authority, the middle of the highway as proposed
to be improved in accordance with the plans or the point half way between the
boundaries of the highway;

(19) "occupier" includes -
(a) any person who for the time being is paying or is liable to pay to the
owner, rent or any portion of the rent of the premises in respect of
which such rent is paid or is p ayable; or

(b) a owner living in or otherwise using his premises; or

(c) a rent free tenant; or

(d) a licensee in occupation of any premises; or

(e) any person who is liable to pay to the owner damage s for the use and
occupation of any premises;

(20) "owner" includes -

(a) any person for the time being receiving or entitled to receive, whether on
his own account or as gent, trustee, guardian, manager or receiv er for
another person or other purpose, the rent or profits of any land or
building; and

(b) the person for the time being in-charge of any land or building or part of
the same;

(21) "State Highways Aut hority" means the officer appointed under sub -section
(1) of section 5;

(22) "survey" includes all operations incidental to the determination,
measurement and record of a boundary or boundaries or any part of a boundary and
includes a re-survey;

(23) "survey mark" means any mark or objec t erected, made, employed or
specified by a survey officer to indicate or determine or assist in determining the
position or level or any point or points;

(24) "vehicle" includes any wheeled conveyance drawn, propelled or driven by
any kind of power including human, animals, motor, steam or electric power and
includes any barrow, sledge, plough, drag or like vehicle.

CHAPTER II.

DECLARATION OF HIGHWAYS, HIGHWAYS AUTHORITIES AND THEIR
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS.

3. On the recommendat ion made by the State Highways Auth ority, the
Government may, by no tification, declare any road, way or la nd to be highway and
classify it as any one of the following, namely: - '

(i) a State Highway;

(ii) a major district roa d;

(iii) other district road; or

(iv) a village road:

Provided that where such road, way or land whether in whole or in part is owned by
any local authority, such notification shall be issued with the concurrence of that local
authority by a resolution passed by it in this behalf.

4. The G overnment may, by notification, de clare any area to be a division for the
purpose of the highways in such area.

5. (1) The Government may, by notification, appoint an officer of the Highways
Department of the Government not below the rank of the Chief Engineer, as the State
Highways Authority.
(2) The Divisional Engin eer, Highways Department of the Government in charge of each division, shall be the Highways authority for that division.

Declaration of
roads. , ways or
lands as
highways .

Declaration of
divisions.

Appointment of
Highways
Authorities .

Functions of
Highways
Authorities .

Power of
Government
to enter into
agreements
for
development
and
maintenance
of highways.

6. (1) The State Highways Authority shall be responsible for the over all supervision
of the construction, maintenance, development or improvement of the highways in the
State and for the restriction of ribbon development along the highways . The State
Highways Authority shall, from time to time, issue such instructions as may be necessary
to the Highways authorities for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) Every Highways authority may, with the approval of the State Highways
Authority, undertake the construction, maintenance, development or improvement of any
highway and for restriction of ribbon development along such highwa y, including for the
prevention and removal of encroachments and for all matters necessary or incidental
thereto, in its division, in such manner and within such time as may be specified by the
State Highways Authority in this behalf.

7. The Government may, in consultation with the State Highways Authority, enter
into an agreement with any person, in relation to the construction, development,
maintenance or repair of the whole or any part of any highway.

Power to fix
highway.
boundary.
building line,
control line,
etc.
CHAPTER III.

RESTRICTION OF RIBBON DEVELOPMENT.

8. (1) The Highways authority of any division may, by notification, in relation
to any highway or any area in that division, where the construction or development
of a highway is undertaken or proposed to be undertaken, fix --

(a) the highway boundary, building line, or control line; or

(b) the highway boundary and the building line; and

(c) the building line and the control line:

Provided that before the publication of the notification under this sub -section, a draft
of the said notification shall be published inviting objections, if any, on the proposed
fixation.
(2) The draft of the notification under sub -section (1) shall co ntain --

(a) all details of lands situated between the highway boundary line and
control line proposed to be fixed and in the case of new works, the lands
and persons benefitted by the construction or development of such
highway, and .

(b) notice requiring all persons likely to be affected by such notification, to
make their objections or suggestions, if any, in writing, with respect to the
issue of such a notification, to the Highways authority within such period
as may be prescribed.

(3) After considering the representation. If any, received under sub -section (2),
the Highways authority may, wit h the approval of the State High ways Authority -
(i) drop the proposal to fix the highway boundary, the building line or the
control line; or

(ii) publish the final notification under sub-section (1) with such modifications
as may be considered nece ssary.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections (1), (2) and (3), the
Government may, in consultation with the State Highways Authority, having regard to the
situation or the requirements of any highw ay or t he condition of the area through which
such highway passes, --

(a) fix different building line and control line for such highway; or

(b) refrain fr om fixing the building lin e or control line for such high way or
portion thereof.

9. On or after the date of the publication of the notification under sub-section (1) of
such area, in respect of any land lying between the highway boundary and the building line
or between the building line and the control line, as the case may be. -

(a) erect any building or make or extend any excavation or carr y out any mining
or other operation in, or over such land or make any mat erial change in the
use of, or construct , form, or layout any works on s uch land; or

(b) construct, form or lay out any means of access to or from such highway,

except with the written permission of the Highways authority an d in accordance with
such terms and conditions, as may be specified in such permission.

10. Nothing contained in section 9 shall apply to -

(a) the erection of any building or the making or extension of any excavation
or the carrying out of any mining or other operation or the making of any
material change or the construction, formation or laying out of any means
of access or of works already commenced, or

(b) any excavation or works nec essary for the repairs, renewal, enlargement
or maintenance of any sewer, drain, electric line, pipe, duct or other
apparatus made or extended or constructed, fo rmed or laid out in, or over,
or under, any land,

before the date of the publication of the notification under sub -section (1) of section 8.

11. When any building or part thereof erected before the date of the publication of
the notification under sub -section (I) of section 8 is lying between the highway boundary
and the building line, the Hi ghways authority may, wh enever any such building or part
thereof, either entirely, or in greater part, is taken down or burnt down or has fallen down,
by notice, require the owner or occupier of such building or part thereof, when re -erected,
to be set back to the building line or control line.

12. If the Highways authority is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do
in the interest of public safety or convenience of traffic , it may, by notification, and from
a date to be specified therein, regulate or divert any existing right of access to a highway
across any land lying between the high way boundary and control line:

Provided that the existing right of access shall not be dive rted until alternative access
has been given:

Provided further that where any existing right of access is diverted, the point at which
alternative access to the highway is given shall not be unreasonably away from the
existing point of access .

13. (1 ) The Highways authority of every division shall. within such time as may be
prescribed , cause to be prepared a map of that division through which any highway or the
construction or development of any highway is undertaken or pr oposed to be undert aken,
showing the highway boundaries, building line and control line of suc h highway, the
boundaries of su ch area and such other particulars , as may be prescribed.

Restriction on
building.

Exemption for
works in
progress, etc.

Setting back of
building
beyond
building
lines.

Regulation of
diversion or
right of access
to highways.

Preparation of
maps

.

Powers of
Highways
Authority and
other
officers.

(2) It shall be open to the Highways Authority to make corrections to the map
prepared under sub -section (1) with necessary additions, alterations, omissions or such
other modifications as may be considered necessary.

(3) The map shall, after the approval of the State Highways Authority, -

(a) be kept in the office of the Highways Authority, with such particulars as
may be prescribed; and

(b) be open to inspection, free of charge during office hours, by any person
having interest.

(4) Nothing contained in the Registration Act, 1908 shall be deemed to require
the registration of the map prepared under this section and such map shall, for the
purposes of sections 53, 54 and 55 of that Act, be deemed to have been duly
registered in accordance with the provisions of that Act.

14. (1) For the purpose of carry ing out the provisions of this Act, the Highways
Authority and any officer or servant authorised by it, shall have power to -

(a) enter upon, survey and take measurement and levels of any land; or

(b) mark such levels, dig or bore into the sub -soil of any land ; or

(c) demarca te the boundaries of the highwa y by planting stones or other
suitable marks all along the highway in such a manner that the imaginary line adjoining
such stones or marks shows the road boundary correctly; or

(d) give consecutive numbers to such boundary stones or marks and maintain
them on the ground as if they constitute part of the highway; or

(e) layout the building line and control line by placing marks and cutting
trenches.

(2) For the purpose o f making the survey, taking measurements, levels, boundaries
or for making lines, the Highways Authority or its officers or servants may cut down and
clear away any standing crops, tree, fence, or jungle or any part thereof and do such other
acts as may be neces sary in this behalf :

Provided that the Highways Authority or its officers or servants shall not
enter any premises, except with the consent of the owner or occupier thereof and after
giving such person at least forty eight hours notice in writing of their intention to do so,
and if the owner or occupier is not available, record the fact in a notice and affix such
notice in the place, before carrying any such work.

CHAPT ER IV .
ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY.
Power t o 15. (1) If the Government are satisfied that any land is required for the purpose of
acquire land. any highway or for construction of bridges, culverts, causeways or other structures
thereon or for any purpose incidental or ancillary thereto, in furtherance of the objects of
this Act, they may acquire such land by publishing in the Tamil Nadu Government G azette
a notice specifying the description of suc h land and the particular purpose for which such
land is required.

(2) Before publishing a notice under sub -section (1), the Government […], 2 […], [ ]
shall call upon the owner and any other person having interest in such land to show
cause within such time as may be specified in the notice, why the land should not be acquired.
The Government […], 2 […], [ ] shall also cause a public notice to be given in such
manner as may be prescribed.

Insert ed [TNGG No. II(2)/Highways/656/200 /15-10-2003- G.O. Ms. No. 206, Highways (HN2)Dept. 29.09.2003 ].
Superseded [TNGG No. II(2)/HWMP/394/201 /07-11-2011 - G.O. Ms. No. 78, HMP (HF1)Dept./ 22.06. 2011] .
Authorizes the D istrict Revenue Officer of the D istrict concerned and the Special District Revenue Officer (Land Acquisition)
[TNGGE No. II(2)/HWMP /526(A)/2014 – G.O.Ms.No.99, HMP(HF1)Dept. / 01.09.2014]. Central Act
of 1908

(3) The Government may, after considering the cause, if any, shown by the owner
or other person having interest on such land, pass such an order under sub -section (1), as
they may deem fit. ..

16. (1) When a notice under sub -section (1) of section 15 is published in. the
Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, the land to which the said notice shall, on and from the date of
such public ation, vest absolutely in the Government free f rom all encumbrances:

Provided that if before actual possession of such land is taken by or on behalf of
the Government, it appears for the Government, th at the land is no more required for the
purpose of this Act, the Government may, by notice published in the Tamil Nadu
Government Gazette, withdraw the land from acquisition. On the publication of such
notice, the land shall revest with retrospective effect in the person from whom it was
divested of on the issue of order under sub -section (l) of section 15 subject to such
encumbrance, if any, as may be subsisting at that time:

Provid ed further that the owner and other persons interested shall be entitled to
payment of an amount as determined in accordance with th e provisions of section 19 for
the damages if any, suffered by them in consequence of the acquisition proce edings.

(2) Where any land is vested in the Government under sub -section (1 ). the
Government may, by order, direct any person who may be in possession of the land to
surrender or deliver possession thereof to the Collector or any person duly autho rized by
him in this behalf, within thir ty days of the service of the o rder.

(3) If any person refuses or fails to comply with an order made under sub -section
(2), the Collector may take possession of the land, and may for that purpose, use s uch
force as may be necessary.

17. Where a ny land has been acquired under this Act, the Government may use or
cause to be used such land for the purpose of this Act.

18. Every owner or person interested in any land acquired under this Act shall be
entitled to receive and be paid an amount as hereinafter provided.

19. (1) Where any land is acquired by the Government under this Act, the Governm ent
shall pay an amount for such acquisition, which shall be determined in accordance with
the provisions of this section.

(2) Where the amount has been determined by agreement between the Government
and the person to whom the amount has to be paid, it shall be paid in accordance with such
agreement.

(3) Where no such agreement can be reached, the Government shall refer the case
to the Collector for determination of the amount to be paid for such acquisition as also the
person or persons to whom such amount shall be paid:

Provided that no amount exceeding such amount as the Government may, by
general or special order, specify, to be paid for su ch acquisition shall be determin ed by
the Collector without the previous approval of the Government or such officer as the
Government may appoint in this behalf.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (3), after the case is
referred to the C ollector under that sub -section, but before he has finally determined the
amount, if the amount is determine d by agreement between the Government and the
person to whom the amount has to be paid, such amount shall be paid by t he Collector in
accordance with such agreement.

(5) Before f inally determining the amount, the Collector shall give an opportu nity
to every person to whom the amount has to be paid to state his case as to the amount.

Land acquired to
vest in
Government
free from all
encumbrances.

Use of Land
acquired.

Right to receive
amount.

Determination of
amount.

Reference to
Court.

Apportionment
of amount.

(6) In determining the amount, the Collector shall be guided by the provisions
contained in sections 23 and 24 and other relevant provisions of the Land Acquisition Act,
1894, subject to modifications that in the said sections 23 and 24, the references to the
date of publication of the notification under sub -section (1) of section 4 and the date of
publication of the declaration under section 6 of the said Act shall be construed as
references to the date of publication of notice under sub -sections (2) and (1), respectively.
of section 15 of this Act.

(7) For the purpose of determining the amount -

(a) the Collector sh all have power to require any p erson to deliver to him such
returns and assessments as be considers necessary;

(b) the Collector shall also have power to require any person known or
believed to be interested in the land to deliver to him a s tatement containing as far as may
be practicable, the name o f every other person interested in th e land as co-owner,
mortgagee, tenant or otherwise, and the nature of such interest , and of the rents and
profits, If any, received or receivable on account thereof for three years next preceding
the date of the statement.

(8) Every person required to deliver a return, assessment or statement under sub section (7) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of section 175
and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code.

(9) The Collector may hear expert witnesses if it be necessary to do so in any
particular case.

(10) The C ollector or any officer authoris ed by him in this behalf shall be entitled
to enter in and inspect any land which is subject to proceedings ·before him.

(11)The Collector shall dispose of every case referred to him under sub -section
(3) for determination of amount as expeditiously as possible and in any case within six
months from the date of such reference .

(12) Where any case is referred to any Collector under sub -section (3), the
Government may, at any stage by order, in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein,
transfer it to any other officer, and upon such transfer, unless some special directions are
given in the order, the officer to whom the case is transferred, may hear and dispose of
the case from the stage at which it was transferred or the case may be heard and disposed
of by h im denovo.

19. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Collector, or the officer to whom
the case was tra nsferred, d etermining the amount may, within sixty days from the date of
such decision, i n so far as it affects him, by application to the Collector or the officer to
whom the case was transferred, require that the mat ter be referred by him for the
determination of the Court as defined in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and when any
such application is made, the provisions of Part III of the said Act shall mutatis mutandis
apply to further proceedings in respect thereof.

(2) The decision o f the C ourt on such reference and subject only to such decision,
the decision of the Collector determining the amount shall be final.

21. (1) Where severa l persons claim to be intereste d in the amount determined, the
Collector shall determine the persons who in his opin ion, are entitled to receive the
amount and the amount payable to each of them.
(2) When the amount has been determined under section 19, if any dispute arises
as to the apportion ent of the same or any part thereof , or as to the persons to whom the
same or any part thereof is payable , the Collector may refer such dispute for the decision
of the Court.

Central Act of

Central Act
of 1860
Central Act
of 1894

22. ( 1) Where the amount is determined by agreement, the Government shall pay
such amount to the person or pers ons entitled thereto.
.
(2) Where the amount is determined by the Collector or by any other officer und er
the provisions of section 19, the Government shall tender payment of the amount
determined to the persons entitled thereto according to such determination and shall pay
to them unless prevented by someone or more of the contingencies mentioned in sub section (3).
(3) If the persons en titled to amount according to the decision of the Collector do
not consent to receive it, or if there be no person competent to alienate the land or if there
be any disputes as to the title to receive the amount, the Government shall deposit the
amount s o determined in the Court:
Provided that any person admitted to be interested may receive such payment
under protest as to the sufficiency of the amount: .
Provided further that nothing herein contained shall affect the liability of any
person, who may r eceive the whole or any part of .any amount determined under this
Chapter, to pay the same to the person lawfully entitled thereto.

23. Where any amount has been deposited in court under sub -section (3) of section
22, the Court may either of its own motion or on the application made by or on behalf of
any party interested or claiming to be interested in such amount, order the same to be
invested in such Government or other securities approved by the Government as it may
think proper, and may direct the interest or other proceeds of any such investment to be
accumulated and paid in such manner as will, in its opinion, give the parties interested
therein the same benefit there from as they might have had from the land in respect
whereof such amount has been deposited or as near thereto as may be.

Payment of
amount.

Investment of
amount
deposited in
the Court.
24. When the amount is not paid or deposited on or before taking possession of the
land, the Government shall pa y the amount determined with interest thereon at the rate of
nine per cent per annum from the time of so taking possession until it shall have been so
paid or deposited.

25. Any· officer of the Govern ment, and person, either generally or specially
authorized by the Government in this behalf, may ente r into or upon any land or buil ding
with or without assistants or workmen for the purpose of -
(a) Making any inspection, survey, meas urement, valuation or enquiry or taking
levels of such land or buildings: .
(b) examing works under construction and ascer taining the course of sewers and
drains;
(c) digging or boring into the sub -soil;
(d) setting out boundaries and lines b y placing marks and cutting trenches;

(e) doing any other thing necessary for the efficient administration of this Act:

Provided that --
(i) no such entry shall be made except between the hours of sunrise and
sunset and without giving reasonable notice to the occupier, or if there be no occupier, to
the owner of the land or building;
(ii) sufficient opportunity shall , in every instance, be given to enable women
(if any ) to withdraw from such land or building; .

(iii) due regard shall a lways be had, s o far as may be compatible with the
exigencies of the purpose for which the entry is made, to the social and religious usages
of the occupants of the land or building entered ..

Payment of
interest.

Power of entry

Prevention of
unauthorised
occupation of
highways.

Power to cancel
permission .
CHAPTER V .

PREVENTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCU PATION OF, AND ENCROACHMENT
ON, A HIGHWAY AND REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENT .

26. (1) No person shall occupy or encroach on any highway within the highway
boundaries.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), the Highways authority
may, with the concurrence of the Collector and with due regard to the safety and
convenience of traffic and subject to such conditions, and on payment of such rent or
other charges as may be prescribed, grant pe rmission, of a temporary nature, to any
person -

(a) to make any temporary use of any highway in front of any building owned or
occupied by him or make a temporary structure overhanging the hig hway; or

(b) to put up a temporary owning or tent, pandal or other similar erection or a
temporary stall or scaffolding on any highway; or

(c) to deposit or cause to be deposited building materials, goods for sale or
other articles on any highway for a specified period; or

(d) to make a temporary excavation on any highway for carrying out any
repairs or improvements to building on lands adjoining such highway:

Provided that no such permission shall be deemed to be valid beyond a
period of one yea r, unless it is expressly renewed by the Highways authority.

(3) The permission granted under sub -section (2) shall clearly specify the date
upto which and the purpose for which the occupation of the highway is authorised and the
exact portion of the highway so pe rmitted to be occupied, and shall also be accompanied
by a plan or sketch of that portion of the highway. A copy of such permission shall be
communicated to the Collector for the purpose of record.

(4) The person in whose favour such permission has been given shall produce the
permit for inspection whenever called upon to do so by the Highways authority, or any
officer authorised by it in that behalf and shall, at the end of the period specified in the
permit, vaca te the portion of the highway occupied by him, after restoring it to the same
state as it originally stood before the occupation by him.
(5) The Highways authority shall maintain a complete record of all such
permissions granted, and shall also cause an inspection to be made in every case at the
expiration of the period upto which such occupation has been permitted, to ensure that the
portion of the highway has actually been vacated.

(6) The permission granted under sub -section (2) shall be in such form and
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.

27. (1) The Highways authority may cancel the permission granted under sub -
section (2) of section 26 for violation of the conditions of permission subject to which the
same has been gr anted:

Provided that no such cancellation shall be ordered without issuing a notice to the
holder of the permit , to make his representation, if any.

(2) Where any permission is cancelled under sub -section (1), the holder of the
permission shall not be entitled to any amount in respect of such cancellation or to the
refund of any rent or charge paid by him in advance.

/

28. (1) The Highw ays authority or any person authorised by it in this behalf shall, at
such time as may be considered necessary, conduct such checks and periodical inspection,
of the highway boundaries, with the view to ensure the prevention of unauthorised
encroachment and the removal of such encroachment.

(2) The Highways authority or any person authorised by it in this behalf, may --

(i) remove, without any notice, any movable temporary structure, enclosure,
stall, booth, any article whatsoever hawked, exposed or displayed for sale or any other
thing whatsoever by way of encroaching the highway or in any area where the construction or
development of a highway is undertaken or proposed to be undertaken;

(ii) remove any immovable structure, whether permanent or t emporary in
nature, encroaching the highway or in the area vested with Government under this Act,
after issuing a show cause notice against such removal, returnable within a period of
seven days from the date of receipt thereof:

Provided that any representation received within the time limit shall be
considered by the authority or officer concerned before passing final orders.

29. (1) Whenever any encroachment is removed or any protective work is carried out
in respect of any en croachment, the cost thereof shall be recovered from the person
responsible for the encroachment, as if it were an arrear of land revenue.

(2) The materials, if any, recovered as a result of the removal or any encroachment
shall be handed over to the person responsible for the encroachment on payment of the
cost, if any, recoverable under sub -section (1). Where the cost is not paid, the materials
seized shall be disposed of, in such manner as may be prescribed.

Prevention of
encroach ment.

Recovery of
cost of
removal of
encroach -
ment.

30. (1) Where any person has erected any building or made or extended any
excavation or carried out any mining or other operation or m ade any material change in
the use of land, or constructed, formed or laid out any work of means of access or an y other
acts in contravention of section 9 or in contravention of any of the terms and conditions
of the permiss ion granted under sub -section (2) of section 26, the 'Highways authority
may, by order, require such person to restore the land or building to its original condition
or to bring the land or buildin g in conformity with the terms and conditions specified in
such permission, within such period as may be specified in the order.

(2) If such perso n fails to comply with such order within the period specified in
the order, the Highways authority may itself take such measures as appear to it to be
necessary to give effect to the order and recover the cost thereof from such person as an
arrear of land revenue.

CHAPTER VI.

PAYMENT OF AMOUNT FOR PROPERTY AFFECTED .

31. Any person whose property is injuriously affected by virtue of anything done
under the provisions of section 11 may make a claim for this purpose to the Highways
authority, with such particulars and within such period as may be prescribed.

32.(1) The Highways authority shall proceed to inquire, in such manner as may be
prescribed, into every claim made under section 31.

(2) The Highways authority shall, after such inquiry, either allow the cla im and
determine the amount or reject the claim in part or in full.

(3) The Highways authority shall give to the claimants or their representatives,
notice in writing, of the amount determined under sub -section (2).

Restoration of
Property to
original state
where it is
dealt with in
contravention
of section 9 .

Right to
amount.

Enquiry into
claims and
award of
payment.

Appeal to State
Highways
Authority .

33. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order o f the Highways authority under
Highways Authority.

(2) The State Highways Authority may suspend the execution of any decision or
order, pending the exercise of its power under this section in respect thereof.

Notice to
owners and
persons
interested .

Inquiry and
order.

Increase in
value and
betterment
charges ·

Reference
against order
of Highways
Authority
Under sec tion

CHAPTER VII.

LEVY OF BETTERMENT CHARGES .

34. Where any work , which the Highways authority is empowered to undert ake, in
relation to any highway, by or under the provisions of this Act is undertaken, it shall give
notice to the persons known or believed to be the owners of. or interested in, the lands
benefited b y such work, requiring them to appear before him either personally or by an
agent, at a time and place therein mentioned (such time not being earlier than fifteen days
from the date of re ceipt of notice) to state their objections, if any, to the im position and
recovery o f betterment charges on such lands:

Provided that no such notice shall be given, unless the Collector, with the
previous sanction of the Government, has declared that the value of such lands is likely
to increase or has increased by reason of such work.

35. On the date fixed under section 34 or on such other da te to which the inquiry may
be adjourned, the Highways Authority shall, after holding a formal inquiry and after
hearing the objections, if any, sta ted by the persons as required by the notice under
(a) the lands benefited by the work referred to in section 34;

(c) the increase in the value of such lands by such work;
(d) the amount of the betterment charg es leviable on each or the said lands;
(e) the date from which such betterment charge s shall be leviable:

Provided that no betterment charg es shall be levia ble in respect of any land -
(i) which is unsuitable for development as a building site, or
(ii) which is situated beyond a distance of two hundred meters from the middle of
the highways on either side.

36. (1) The increase in value on account of the work referred to in section 34 shall be
the amount by which the value of the land on the date of the completion of such work is
likely to exceed or has exceeded the value of the land on the date of the commencement
of su ch work and the betterment charg es shall be such amount as may be specified by
Government from time to time.

(2) for the purpose of sub -section (1), the Government shall, by notification,
specify -
(a) the date of commencement of such work; and

(b) the date of c ompletion of such work.
37. (1) Any person aggrieved by the order fix ing the betterment charges under section
may, by a written application to the Highways Authority require that the matte r be
referred, if the land in relation to which the order is made is situated -
(i) in th e City of Chennai, to the Princi pal Judge of the City Civil Co urt.
Chennai, rand

(ii) elsewhere, to the Principal District Judge of the district, within whose
jurisdiction the land is situate.

(2) Any such application shall be made within six weeks from the date of receipt
of the order of the Highways Authority by such person and shall be in such form as may
be prescribed.

(3) The provisions of sections 5, 12 and 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply
to the comp utation of the time under sub -section (2).

(4) The Highways Authority shall make the reference under sub -section (1) in
such manner as may be prescribed.

38. The order fixing the betterment charges made under section 35, subject to a
reference to the Court under section 37, shall be final.

39. From the date specified in the order fixing the bette rment charges as the date from
which such charges shall be leviable, or from such date as may be otherwise specified by
the Hig hways authority under section 35 as the date from which such charges shall be
leviable, subject to the prior payment of the land revenue, if any, due to the Government
thereon, be a first charge on the land in respect of which such betterment charges are
leviable.

40. The betterment charges shall be payable within such period as may be prescribed:

Provided that the owner of the land on which such charges are imposed may
execute an agreement, in favor of the Government, agreeing to pay the amount o f such
charges by annual installments, together with interest at such rate and within such period,
as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER VIII.

PROVISIONS TO SECURE SAFETY OF TRAFFIC AND PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO
HIGHWAYS .

41. (1) Whenever the Highways Authority is of opinion that it is necessary for the
prevention of danger arising from obstruction of the view of persons using any highway,
at any bend or at any corner of such highway, it may ser ve a notice upon the owner or
occupier of land along side or at the bend or corner of such highway to alter, within such
time and in such manner as may be specified in the notice, the height or character of any
existing wall (not being a wall forming par t of a permanent structure), fence, hedge, tree
or any other object thereon, so as to cause it to conform with any requirements specified
in the notice.

(2) If any person upon whom a notice has been served under sub -section (1),
objects to comply with any requirement of such notice, he may, within fifteen days from
the date of its receipt, send to the Highways Authority his objection in writing stating the
grounds thereof.

(3) The Highways Authority shall, within one month from the date of receipt of
the objection, consider the grounds advanced and shall, by order in writing either
withdraw the notice or amend or confirm it.

(4) If any person is aggrieved by an order issued by the Highways Authority
under sub -section (3), he may prefer an appeal within fifteen days from the date of receipt
of such order to the State Highways Authority, whose decision in the matter shall be final.

Central Act 36
of 1963
Finality of order
fixing
betterment
charges and
decision on
reference.
Betterment
charges to be
first charge
on land, next
to land
revenue.
Payment of
betterment
charges.
Prevention of
obstruction of
view of
persons using
any highway.

(5) If any person fails to comply with the notice served on him under sub -section (1)
as amended or confirmed as the case may be under sub -section (3) or (4) the Highw ays
authority may take such action as may be consid ered necessary to alter the object. The
expenditure incurred for such alternation shall be recovered from such person as an arrear of
land revenue , without prejudice to any other action which may be take n, against him.

42. If at any time it appears to the Highways authority that any highway in its
division or any portion thereof is or has been rendered unsafe for vehicular traffic or
pedestrian traffic by reason of damage or otherwise. it may subject to the provisions
contained in section 43 and subject to such conditions as may he prescribed, either close
the highway or the portion of it to all traffic or to any class or traffic or regulate the
number and speed or weight of the vehicles using such highway.
43. (1) Where, in exercise of the power s conferred on it by section 42, the Highwa ys
authority desires to close down any highway or part thereof permanently, it shall give
notice of its intention so to do in the Tamil Nadu Gover nment Gazette . The notice shall
also be published in at least two newspapers one of which sha ll be in Tamil.

(2) The notice shall indicate the alternative route, if any, which is pro posed to be
provided or which m ay already be in existence, and shall also invite objections, if any, to
the proposal to be submitted to the State Highways Authority under sub -section (3),
within such time as may be specified in the notice.

(3) The Highways authority shall finalise its proposal to close down such
highway or part of it, after con sidering the objections, if any, received within the specified
time, and shall submit a proposal to the State Highways Authority for approval, together
with such objections as may have been received against such proposal.

(4) The State Highways Authority may, either approve such proposal , with or
without modification or reject it.

(5) When the State Highways Authority has approved such proposal, it shall
publish an order to that effect in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette.

(6) When such order has been published, the Highways authority shal l arrange
for further publicity to be given to the order in atleast two newspapers, one of which shall
be in Tamil and the highway or part thereof shall, then, be closed.

(7) Whenever any highway or any part thereof has been so closed. reasonable
compensation shall be paid to every person who was entitled, otherwise than as a mere
member of the public, to sue such highway or part thereof as a means of access to or from
his p roperty and has suffered damage because of such closure .

44. Where the Highways authority is satisfied that any highway or a portion thereof,
or any bridge, culvert or causeway built on across such highway is not designed to carry
vehicles of which the laden weight exceeds such limit as may be fixed in this behalf, it may
prohibit or restrict the plying of such vehicles on or over such highway or such part of the
highway or such bridge, culvert or c auseway.

45. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, but subjected to the provisions of section 70 , no person, other than the H ighways
authority or any person authorised by it , shall construct or carry any cable, wire, pipe,
drain sewe r or chan nel of any kind through, across, under or over' any highway, except
with the permission in writing of the highways authority.

(2) In giving the consent, the High ways authority may impose such conditions as
it may deem to be necessary and may also impose a rent or other charges for any land
forming part of the highway occupied by or applied to the proposed work.

Highways
authority to
regulate
traffic when
Highway is
declared
unsafe.
Procedure to be
followed
when
Highways
Authority
desires
permanently
to close any
highway.
Prohibition of
use of heavy
vehicle on
certain
highways.
Consent of
Highways
authority
required to
certain Acts
on highways.

(3) If any person con structs or carries out any work in contravention of sub -
section (1), the Highways authority may arrange for the removal of such work and
restoration of the highway to its former condition as if the work constituted an
encroachment on the highway, and such expenses as the Highways authority may incur
for this purpose shall, without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against such
person, be recovered from him in accordance with the proce dure provided in section 29,
in so far as that procedure is applicable.

46. (1) No person shall willfully cause, or allow any vehicle or animal in his charge
to cause, any damage to any highway.

(2) Where any damage has been caused to any highway in contravention of sub -
section (I), the Highways authority shall repair such damage and recover the expenses
incurred in this regard from such person who caused such damage, as if it were an arrear
of land revenue, witho ut prejudice to any action that may be taken against such person for
such contravention under section 50.

CHAPTER IX .

PENALTIES.

47. Any person who -

(a) willfully or without any reasonable excus e, disobeys any summons, requisition
or other lawful order or direction issued under or in pursuance of this Act; or

(b) resists or obstructs any officer or authority in the exercise of any power
conferred on, or in the discharge of any duty entrusted to, such officer or authority by or
under any of the provisions of this Act; or

(c) being required by or under any of the provisions of this Act to make any return
or to furnish any informatio n,-

(i) makes a false return or furnishes false information; or

(ii) willfully withholds or fails to furnish information,

shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

48, Whoever erects, alters or extends any building or makes any excavation or
constructs any means of access to or from a highway or does any other work in
contravention of the provisions of this Act shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees and with further fine which may ext end to fifty
rupees for each day after such conviction, during which the offending structure or work
is not removed, demolished or cleared and the site not res tored to its original condition.

49. Whoever
(a) occupies or makes any encroachment on any highway in contravention of the
provisions of section 26; or

(b) fails to comply with the notice served on him under clause (ii) of sub -section
(2) of section 28.

shall on conviction , be punishable .

(i) for the first offence with fine which may extend to two hundred
rupees , and Prevention and
rectification
of damage to
highway.
Disobedience of
summons,
requisition,
etc.
Contravention
of restrictions
relating to
access or
erecting any
building, etc.
Unauthorised
occupation of
highway.

(ii) for any subsequent offence in relation to the same encroachment, with
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees plus a further fine not exceeding fifty
rupees per day on which such occupation of the highway or encroachment continues.

50. Whoever in contravention of the provisions of section 46 willfully causes or
allows any vehicle or animal in his charge to cause any damage to any highway, shall, on
conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

51. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any rules or order
made thereunder shall, if no other penalty is provided for such offence under this Act, on
conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees or if having
been previously convicted of such offence under this Act, with fine which may extend to
two hundred rupees.

52. (1) Where an offenc e against any of the provisions of this Act, or any rule made
thereunder has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence
was committed, was in -charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where any such
offence has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part
of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded again st and punished accordingly.

Explanation .- For the purposes of this section -

(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and

(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.

53. (1) Any offence punishable under this Act may, either before or after making the
complaint, be compounded by the Highways authority on payment, for credit to the
Government, of such sum as the Highways authority may specify:

Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the
fine which may be imposed under this Act for the offence so compounded.

(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section (1), no proceeding
or further proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the offender, in respect
of the offence so compounded, and the offender, if in custody, shall be discharged forth -
with.

(3) No offence punishable under this Act shall be co mpounded except as
provided by this section.

54. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on complaint
made by the Highways authority.

Causing
damage to
highways.
General
provisions
for
punishment
of offences.
Offences by
companies.
.
Compounding
of offences.
.
Cognizance of
offence.
.

CHAPTER X.

MISCELLANEOUS.

55. (1) The Government may, of their own motion or on an application, call for and
examine the record of any authority or officer in respect of any proceedings, the
correctness, legality or propriety of any decision, taken or order passed therein, and if in
any case, it appears to the Government that any such decision or order should be modified,
revised, annulled, reversed or remitted for reconsideration, th ey may pass orders
accordingly.

(2) No application to the Government for the exercise of their power under sub -
section (1) shall be made -

(a) in respect of any proceeding of any authority or officer of any decision
taken or order passed in any such proceeding unless an appeal had already been preferred
in respect of such proceeding, decision or order under this Act and such appeal had been
disposed off; and

(b) after the expiry of such period as may be prescribed, after the disposal of
such appeal.

(3) The Government may suspend the execution of any decision or order pending
the exercise of their power under sub -section (1), in respect thereof.

56. (1) The Government may, by notification, authorise any authority or officer to
exercise any of the powers vested in them by this Act, other than the powers conferred by
sections 55, 65 and 66 and may , in like manner, withdraw such authorisation.

(2) The exercise of any power delegated under sub -section (1) shall be subject
to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified in the notification and also to
control and revision by the Government.

57. The Government may issue to the State Highways Authority or to any Highways
authority such orders and directions, as in their opinion are necessary or expedient, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act and such authority shall give effect to all suc h orders
and directions.

58. The Government, the State Highways Authority or any Highways authority may,
at their or its discretion, consult such authority or officer as may be prescribed, in
exercising any power or discharging any duty or performing any function under or in
pursuance of this Act.

59. It shall be the duty of every police officer to -
(a) communicate without delay to the Highways authority, any information
which such police officer receives of a design to commit, or of the commission of, any
offence against this Act or any rule made thereunder;

(b) assist the Highways authori ty or any officer or servant of the Highways
authority reasonably demanding the aid of such police officer for the lawful exercise of
any power vested in the Highways authority or any such officer or servant under this Act
or any rule made thereunder for enforcing the provisions of this Act.
60. 1t shall be the duty of every Village Administrative Officer, or other revenue
officer, by whatever designation known -
(a) to prevent the destruction, removal, alternation or displacement of, or
damage or injury to, or tampering with, any survey mark, or any mark showing the
highway boundary, control line or building line; and
Power of
Government
to call for
records and
pass orders.

Delegation of
powers.

Power of
Government
to issue
orders and
directions to
subordinate
officers.
Consultation
with other
authorities.
Duties of
police
officers.

Duties of
Village
Administra -
tive Officers.

(b) when he become aware that any such mark has been destroyed, removed,
altered, displaced, damaged, injured or tampered with, to report the fact to the nearest
Highways authority or to any officer or servant under the Highways authority.

61. (1) The Highways authority or any officer authorized in this behal f by the
Government shall for the purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 when trying a suit in respect or the
following matters, namely: -
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;

(b) requiring the discovery and production of do cuments;

(c) compelling the production of books of account and other documents: and

(d) issuing commissions for the examinations of witness or documents.

(2) Any person summoned merely to produce a document shall be deemed to
have complied with the summons, if he causes such documents to be produced, instead
of attending personally to produce the same.

62. Every officer acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of
this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

63. (1) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government of
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done by or under this Act.

(2) (a) No suit, prose cution or other proceedings shall lie against the State
Highways Authority or any Highways authority, or offi cer or person for any thing done
or intended to be done under this Act, without the previous sanction of the Government,
and su ch suit, prosecution or proce eding shall be filed within thirt y days from the date of
the act complained of.

(b) No such authority or officer or person shall be liable in respect of any such
Act in any civil or criminal procee dings, if the Act was done in good faith in the course
of the execution of the duties or the discharge of the functions assigned to such authority
or officer or person by or under this Act.

64. When any notice, bill or other document is required to be served upon or issued
or presented to any person under this Act or any rule made there under, such service, issue
or presentation shall be give n effect--

(a) by giving or tendering such notice, bill or document to such person; or
(b) if such person is not fou nd, by leaving such noti ce, bill or document at his last
known place of abode or bu siness or by giving or ten dering the same to his agent, cle rk
or servant or some adult member of his family; or

(c) if his address elsew here is known, by forwarding such notice, bill or
document of such address by regis tered post; or

(d) if none of the means aforesaid is available, affixing the same in some
conspic uous part of the land or building, if any, to which the notice, bill or document
relates.

65. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the Government are satisfied
that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, they may b y notification,
exempt, subject to such conditions as they deem fit, any land or b uilding or class of
buildings, from all or any of the provisions of this Act.

66. (1) The Gov ernment may make rule s to carry out the purposes of this Act.

(2) (a) All rules made under this Ac t shall be published in the Tamil Nadu
Government Gazette and unless they are expresse d to come into force on a particular day Power
regarding
discovery,
productio n of
evidence,
etc.
. Central Act of

Certain persons
to be public
servants.
. Central Act
of 18 60
Bar of certain
proceedings.
.
Service how to
be effected.
.
Power to
exempt .
.
.
Power to make
rules.
.

shall come into force on the day on which they are so published .

(b) All notifica tions issued under this Act sha ll, unless they are expressed to
come into force on a particular day, come into force on the date on w hich they are so
published.

(3) Every rule or notification made or issued under this Act shall, as soon as
possible after it is made or issued, be place d on the table of the Legislativ e Assembly and
if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session, the
Assembly makes any modification in any such rule or notification or the Ass embly
decides that the rule or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.

67. lf any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Government may, by an order, published in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appears to them to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.

68. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 shall cease to apply to any land which is required for the purpose specified in
sub-section (I) of section 15 and any such land shall be ac quired hy the Government, only
in accordance with the pro visions of this Act.

69. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law, custom,
usage or contract or decree or order of a court or other authority.

70. Nothing in this Act shall affect - Savings.

(a) the rights or any l ocal authority to make any excavation for the purpose of
laying, making, alte ring, repairing or renewing any sewer, drain, water course or
other work; or

(b) the rights of any authority appointed under any law for the time being in force
for gas or water, ele ctricity, railways, tramways or trolley vehicles to erect any support
or make any excavation for the purpose of laying, making, altering. repairing or renewing
any main pipe, sluice , weir, electric line, duct, drain or other apparatus: or

(c) any land belonging to a rai lway administration or belongin g to or used by a
person holding a licence or sanction for the generation, transformation or distribution of
electricity under the Indian Electrici ty Act, 1910 when such land is held or used by the
railway administration or such persons , as the case may be, for the purpose of its railway
or for generation, transformation or distrib ution of electricity, except in so far as they may
consent th ereto; or

(d) any land within the limits of a cantonment or a port: or

(e) any powers and duties of the tele graph authority under the provisions of the
Indian Telegraph Act , 1885 : or

(f) any land within the jurisdiction of any other authority under the administrative
control of the Central Government.

Power to
remove
difficulties .

Land
Acquisition
Act not to
apply,
Central Act I
of 1894
Act to override
contract and
other laws,
etc ..

Central Act IX
of 1910
Central Act XIII
of 1885

Explanation I.- For the purpose of clause (a), the Tamil Nadu Housing Board constituted under the Tamil Nadu
Housing Board Ac t, 1961 and the Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board constituted under the Tamil Nadu Slum
Areas Improvement and Clearance Act, 1971 shall be deemed to be a local authority.

Explanation II.- The saving of rights of authorities in clauses (a) and (b) does not dispense with the seeking of
permission of the highways Authority under section 45.
Tamil Nadu Act
of 1961
Tamil Nadu Act
of 197 1

(By order of the Governor)

A. KRISHNAN KUTTY NAIR,
Secretary to Government,
Law Department.