AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE LEVY OF TOLL ON CER TAIN MOT OR VEHICLES ENTERING INT O THE ST ATE OF ORISSA AND FOR MA TTERS CONNECTED THEREWITH OR INCIDENT AL THERET O.
Be it enacted by the Legislature of the S tate of Orissa in the Forty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:1. (1) This Act may be called the Orissa Transport V ehicles (Levy of Toll)
Act, 1992.
(2) It extends to the whole of the S tate of Orissa.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the S tate Government may , by notification, appoint.
2. Definitions.:- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:(a) "barrier" means a barrier established under section 4 and includes a check post or a barrier established or set up under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947;
(b) "day" means a period from 12'O clock mid-night to the 12'O clock mid-night next;
(c) "operator" means any person whose name is entered in the permit in respect of a transport V ehicle as the holder thereof and includes any person for the time being in charge of such V ehicle;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules;
(e) "rules" means rules made under this Act 59 of 1988
(f) "Regional T ransport Officer" means an of ficer appointed as such under the rules made by the S tate Government under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988;
* Published vide Orissa Act 13 of 1992
For the Bill, see Orissa Gazette, Extraor dinar y, dated the 18th Febr uary 1992 (No.
153)
The Odisha Gazette EXTRAORDINARY PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY No. Date : 21st March 1992
DefinitionsShort title,
extent and commencement:
Orissa Act
of 1947
of 1988
2(g) "toll" means the toll levied under section 3;
(h) "Toll Tax Of ficer" means any of ficer as the S tate Government may ,
by notification, appoint to be the Toll Tax Of ficer for the whole of Orissa or any area or areas thereof for the purposes of this Act, and includes a t axing of ficer under the Orissa Motor V ehicles Taxation Act, 1975;[Orissa Act 39 of 1975.]
(i) "transport vehicle" means a stage carriage, a contract carriage or a goods carriage;
(f) words and expression used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Motor V ehicles Act, 1988 shall have the meanings as respectively assigned to them in that Act.
3. (1) There shall be levied a toll on every transport vehicle registered in any S tate other than Orissa, which enters into Orissa, at such rate not exceeding one hundred fif ty rupees per vehicle as the S tate Government may , by notification,
specify:
Provided that where toll has been paid once in respect of the entry of a vehicle no toll shall be levied for any subsequent entry of the vehicle on the same day.
(2) The toll shall be paid by the operator of the transport vehicle.
4. For the purposes of collection of toll, the S tate Government may , by notification, establish barriers at such places on or near the boundary of the State as may be specified in the notification.
5. No transport vehicle liable to pay toll under section 3 shall be entered into or plied in the S tate unless, the toll has been p aid, and the Toll Tax Of ficer or any of ficer of the Orissa Motor V ehicles Dep artment shall have the power to prevent the entry or plying of such vehicle made in contravention of the provisions of this Act.
6. (1) When so required by the Toll Tax Of ficer or any other person authorised by him in this behalf or any Of ficer of the Orissa Motor V ehicles Department, the driver of a transport vehicle shall stop the vehicle whether at the barrier or any other place within the S tate and keep it st ationary for a reasonable period in order to enable any such officer or the person so authorised, as the case may be, to satisfy himself that the toll, if payable, has been paid and that other provisions of this Act have been complied with.
(2) when the Toll Tax Of ficer or the person authorised by him under subsection (1) or any Of ficer of the Orissa Motor V ehicles Dep artment has reason to believe(a) that the toll has not been paid; or
(b) that any breach of the provisions of this Act has been committed,
he may detain the vehicle or any part or accessory thereof, sufficient in his opinion for realisation of the toll or , as the case may be, the maximum amount of penalty leviable under section 7 for such commitment, until the toll or , as theLevy of toll Establishment of barriers Prohibition of entry without paying toll.
Powers to stop and seizeOrissa Act
of 1975
of 1988
3case may be, the penalty is p aid or , for the penalty , cash security equivalent thereto is furnished:
Provided that no action under this sub-section shall be taken unless the driver of the vehicle has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(3) The vehicle or any part or accessory thereof so detained or the security so deposited shall be dealt with in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. If the Toll Tax Of ficer is satisfied af ter making such enquiry as he may deem necessary that any person has committed a breach of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules, he may order that such person shall p ay, by way of penalty in addition to the toll, if any , payable by him a sum not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees:
Provided that no such order shall be made unless such person has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard
8. Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 7 or any order of detention of any transport vehicle or any part or accessory thereof made under section 6, may , within thirty days from the date of communication of such order to him, prefer an appeal to such appellate authority as may be prescribed and the order of such appellate authority shall be final.
9. (1) The toll shall be levied, paid and collected in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sun-section (1) any toll, penalty or other dues recoverable under this Act, if not p aid within fif teen days of it s becoming due, may be recovered in the same manner as arrears of land revenue.
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Act, on application being made to that ef fect by an operator , a Regional Transport Officer may accept a lump sum in lieu of the amount of toll that may be payable in respect of a transport vehicle for a period of one month or a number of consecutive months, to be paid in advance at such rate as may be prescribed:
Provided that any change in the rate of toll which may come into force after the date of such lump sum payment in advance shall have the effect of making a proportionate change in the lump sum amount paid in relation to the part of the period during which such changed rate remains in force.
11. The S tate Government may , by notification exempt in whole or in p art any transport vehicle or class of transport vehicles from the payment of toll for such period and subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified in the notification.
12. Notwithst anding anything cont ained in this Act, where any reciprocal agreement relating to levy collection and payment of the toll is entered into by the S tate Government with any other S tate Government, the levy , collection and payment of the toll shall be in accordance with the terms and conditions of such agreement: Penalty .
Appeal.
Manner of levy payment and collection of toll Lump sum payment.
Power of S tate Government to exempt from Toll Reciprocal agreement.
4Provided that the toll so levied shall not exceed the toll which would have otherwise been levied under other provisions of this Act.
13. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or purported or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or the rules.
14. (1) The S tate Government may , after previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:(i) the manner of dealing with the vehicle or the part or accessory thereof detained, or the security deposited under sub-section (3) of section 6;
(ii) appellate authority to be prescribed under section 8;
(iii) the manner of levy , payment and collection of the toll under subsection (1) of section 9;
(iv) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.
____Protection of action taken in good faith Powers to make rules