AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE CONTROL OF THE SALE, SUPP LY AND
DISTRIBUTION OF DRUGS- WHEREAS IT IS EXPEDIENT TO P ROVIDE FOR
THE CONTROL OF THE SALE, SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION OF DRUGS. IT IS
HEREBY ENACTED AS FOLLOWS:

1949, prices of drugs and medicines manufactured in the hard currency area went up rapidly
and stocks of such medicines also went underground. The necessity of preventing hoarding
and profiteering in these medicines was immediately felt. As the Assembly was then not in
session, a self-constrained and comprehensive ordin ance was promulgated with the prior
concurrence of the Government of India providing fo r control of safe, supply, distribution,
price-making, limitation on possession and requisit ioning etc. of drugs. It may be mentioned
that the promulgation of such an ordinance was all the more necessary because other
provinces promulgated ordinances for the same purpo se and on the same lines. As the need
(or controlling sale, supply, distribution and pric es etc., of drugs and preventing hoarding and
profiteering in the same is likely to outlive, the ordinance legislation has become necessary.

1. Short title, extent and commencement - (1) This Act may be called the
Orissa Drugs (Control) Act, 1950.

(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Orissa.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. Definitions - (1) In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject
or context

(a) “dealer” means a person carrying on-, either personally or t hrough any
other person, the business of selling any drugs whe ther wholesale or
retail;

(b) “drug” means any drug as defined in Clause (b) of Section 3 of the
Drugs Act, 1940 (XXIII of 1940) in respect of which a declaration has
been made under Section 3;

(c) “offer for sale” includes a reference to an intimation by a person o f
the price proposed by him for a sale of any drug, m ade by the
publication of a price list, by exposing the drug f or sale in association
with a mark indicating price, by the furnishing of a quotation or
otherwise howsoever;

(d) “producer” includes a manufacturer. (2) A drug shall
be deemed to be in the possession of a person

(i) when it is held on behalf of that person by another person or
when held by that person on behalf of another perso n;

(ii) notwithstanding that it is mortgaged to another per son.

3. Drugs to which this Act applies - The State Government may, by
notification, declare any drug to be a drug to whic h this Act shall apply.

4. Fixing of maximum prices and maximum quantities whi ch may be held
or sold - (1) The State Government may, by notification, fix in respect of any drug

(a) the maximum price or rate which may be charged by a dealer or
producer;

(b) the maximum quantity which may at anyone time be po ssessed by a
dealer or producer;

(c) the maximum quantity- which may in anyone tran saction be sold to any
person.

(2) The prices or rates and the quantities fixed in respect of any drug under this
section may be different in different localities or for classes of dealers or producers.

5. Restrictions on sale etc. where maximum is fixed un der Section 4 - No
dealer or producer shall

(a) sell, agree to sell, offer for sale or otherwise di spose of to any person
any drug for a price or at a rate exceeding the max imum fixed by
notification under Clause (a) of Sub-section (1) of Section 4;

(b) have in his possession at anyone time a quantity of any drug exceeding
the maximum fixed by notification under Clause (b) of Sub-section (1)
of Section 4; or

(c) sell, agree to sell or offer for sale to any person in anyone transaction a
quantity of any drug exceeding the maximum fixed by notification under
Clause (c) of Sub.-section (1) of Section 4.

6. General limitation of quantity which may be possess ed at one time - (1)
No person shall have in his possession at anyone ti me a greater quantity of any drug to which
this section applies than the quantity necessary fo r his reasonable needs. )

(2) This section shall apply only to such drugs as t he State Government may, by
order published in the Gazette, specify for the pur pose:

Provided that nothing contained in this section sha ll apply to a dealer or producer in
respect of any drug sold or produced by him.

7. Duty to declare possession of excess stocks - Any person, having in his
possession a quantity of any drug exceeding that pe rmitted by or under this Act, shall
forthwith report the fact to the State Government o r any officer empowered in this
behalf by the State Government and shall take such action as to the storage, distribution or
disposal of the excess quantity as the State Govern ment may direct.

8. Refusal to sell - No dealer or producer shall, unless previously auth orised to
do so by the State Government without sufficient ca use refuse to sell to any person any drug
within the limits as to quantity, if any, imposed b y this Act.

Explanation - The possibility or expectation of obtaining a highe r price for a drug at
a later date shall not be deemed to be sufficient c ause for the purpose of this section.

9. Cash memorandum to be given of certain sales - (1) Every dealer or
producer when selling any drug for cash shall, if t he amount of the purchase is five rupees or
more, in all cases, and, if the amount of the purch ase is less than five rupees, when so requested
by the purchaser, give to the purchaser a cash memo randum containing particulars of the
transaction.

(2) The State Government may, by notification, prescrib e the particulars to be
contained in any such memorandum.

(3) The State Government may, by notification, exempt s pecified areas, classes of
dealers or producers or classes of drugs from the o peration of this section.

10. Marking of prices and exhibiting price List- (1) The State Government
may, by notification and within such date as may be specified therein, direct dealers or
producers in general, or any dealer or producer in particular, to mark any drug exposed or
intended for sale with the sale price or to exhibit on the premises a price list of drugs held for
sale and a statement of the quantities of such drug s in his possession and may also by
notification provide for the manner in which any su ch direction as aforesaid is to be carried
out.

(2) The publication of a notification under Sub-sect ion (1) shall be conclusive
proof of the fact that the persons hereinbefore spe cified had knowledge of the irections and
the manner of carrying out such directions containe d in such notification.

(4) No dealer shall destroy, efface or alter any label or mark affixed to a drug and
indicating the price marked by a producer.

11. Obligation to state price separately on composite o ffer - Where a dealer or
producer makes an offer to enter into a transaction for a consideration to be given as a whole
in respect both of a sale of any drug and of some o ther matter, the dealer or producer making
offer shall state in writing the price which he ass igns to that drug, if he is required to do so by
any person to whom the offer is made, and the offer shall be deemed for the purposes of this
Act to be an offer to sell that drug at the price s o stated.

12. Prohibition or regulation of the disposal of drugs - If in the opinion of the
State Government it is necessary or expedient so to do, they may, by order in writing

(a) prohibit the disposal of any drug except in such ci rcumstances and
under such conditions as may be specified in the or der;

(b) direct the sale of any drug to any such dealer or c lass of dealers and in
such quantities as may be specified in the order; a nd make such further
orders as appear to be necessary or expedient in co nnection with any
order issued under this section.

13. Penalties - (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of th is Act or fails
to comply with any direction made under authority c onferred by this Act shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to th ree years or with both.

(2) A Court convicting any person of an offence puni shable under this Act may
order that the whole or any part of the stock of dr ugs in respect of which the offence was
committed, shall be forfeited to the Government.

(3) It shall be a defence for a person charged with a contravention of any of the
provisions of this section to prove that in relatio n to the matter in respect of which he is
charged, he acted in the course of his employment a s a servant or agent of another person on
the instructions of his employer or of some other s pecified person.

CASE LAW: The accused person exposed drug for sale without ma king sale price. In
such case where no evidence was led to indicate tha t accused had the criminal intention to
violate the provisions of the Act, he cannot be con victed under Section 13 (1) of the Act: AIR
Ori. 214.

14. Offences by corporations - Where a person committing an offence
punishable under this Act is a company or an associ ation or a body of persons, whether
incorporated or not, every manager, secretary, agen t or other officer or person concerned with
the management thereof, shall, unless he proves tha t the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligenc e to prevent its commission, be deemed to
be guilty of such offence.

15. Procedure - (1) No person other than a police officer of or above the rank of
an Inspector of Police or an officer not being belo w the rank of an Inspector of Police
authorised in this behalf by the State Government b y notification shall investigate any
offence under this Act.

(2) No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be instituted
except with the previous sanction of the District M agistrate.

16. Power of search and seizure - Any person competent to investigate any
offence under this Act may search any place in whic h he has reason to believe that an offence
under this Act has been, or is being committed and take possession of any stock of drugs in
respect of which the offence has been or is being c ommitted and the provision of the Code of
Criminal Procedure; 1898, (Act V of 1898) shall, so far as may be applicable, apply to any
search or seizure under this Act as they apply to a ny search or seizure made under the
authority of a warrant issued under Section 93 of t hat Code.

17. Power to make rules - (1) The State Government may make rules to carry
out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the gener ality of the foregoing power
such rules may provide for all or any of the follow ing matters, namely:

(a) the maintenance by dealers and producers generally or by any dealer or
producer in particular, of records of all sale and purchase transactions
made by them;

(b) the furnishing of any information as may require wi th respect to the
business carried on by any dealer or producer;

(c) the inspection of any books of account or other doc uments belonging to
or under the control of any dealer or produce

18. Protection of action taken in good faith - No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against any person for anythi ng in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act,

19. Saving of other laws - The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of any other law for the time bei ng in force regulating any of the matters dealt
with in this Act.