AN
ACT
to consolidate and amend the law relating to land tenures and
land revenue in the State of Uttar Pradesh, and to provide for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows :—
CHAPTER—I
Preliminary
Short title,
extent and
commencement 1. (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Revenue code,
2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh.
(3) It shall come into force on such date* as the State
Government may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be
appointed for different areas or for different provisions of this Code.
Applicability of
the Code 2. The provisions of this Code, except Chapters VIII and IX
shall apply to the whole of Uttar Pradesh, and Chapter VIII and IX
shall apply to the areas to which any of the enactments specified at
serial numbers 19 and 25 of the First Schedule was applicable on the
date immediately preceding their repeal by this Code.
Extension of
the Code to
new areas 3. (1) Where after the commencement of this Code, any area is
added to the territory of Uttar Pradesh, the State Government may, by
notification, extend the whole or any provision of this Code, to such
area.
(2) Where any notification is issued under sub-section (1), the
provisions of any Act, rule or regulation in force in the area referred to
——————————————————————————————————————————
* Rajaswa Anu-1 vide notification no. 1879/1-1-2015-15(1)/1998-19 T.C.-III Lko Dt. 18 Dec. 2015, Sec. 1,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 233 and 234 of U.P. Revenue Code, 2006 shall come
into force on Dt. 18-12-2015 and remaining provisions of said Act shall come into force on dated 11-22016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
in the said sub-section which are inconsistent with the provisions so
applied, shall be deemed to have been repealed.
(3) The State Government may, by a subsequent notification,
amend, modify or alter any notification issued under sub-section (1).
Definitions 4. In this Code,—
(1) ‘abadi’ or ‘village abadi’ means such area in a village which,
on the date of commencement of this Code, is being used for the
purposes of residence of its inhabitants or for purposes ancillary
thereto such as sahan and green trees wells etc. or which may have
been or be hereafter reserved for such use ;
(2) ‘agriculture’ includes horticulture, animal husbandry,
pisciculture, flower farming, bee keeping and poultry farming ;
(3) ‘agricultural labourer’ means a person whose main source of
livelihood is manual labour on agricultural land ;
(4) ‘bank’ shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Uttar
Pradesh Regulation of Money Lending Act, 1976 ;
(5) ‘Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti’ means a Bhumi Prabandhak
Samiti constituted under section 28-A of the U. P. Panchayat Raj Act,
;
(6) ‘Board’ means the Board of Revenue constituted or deemed
to be constituted under section 7 ;
(7) ‘charitable institution’ means any establishment,
undertaking, organization or association formed for a charitable
purpose, and includes a specific endowment ;
(8) ‘Collector’ means an officer appointed as such by the State
Government under sub-section (1) of section 12 and shall include-
(a) an Additional Collector appointed by the State Government
under sub-section (2) of the said section ; and
(b) an Assistant Collector of the first class empowered by the
State Government by notification to discharge all or any of the
functions of a Collector under this Code ;
(9) ‘Consolidated Gaon Fund’ means the Consolidated Gaon
Fund constituted under section 69 ;
[(10) ‘family’, in relation to a tenure-holder, means himself or
herself and his wife or her husband or third gender spouse, as the case
may be, (other than a judicially separated wife or husband or third
gender spouse), minor sons and minor daughters other than married
daughters and third gender minor issue.
Explanation.– Third Gender means such a person who is of a
gender different from the male or female gender.]
Provided that where the question relates to the transfer of any
land and the transferee is a minor, the expression ‘family’ shall include
the parents of such minor ;
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(11) ‘grove land’ means any specific part of land in a holding
having trees (not including papaya, banana plants) planted thereon in
such manner that they preclude, or when full grown will preclude, the
land or any considerable portion thereof from being used primarily for
any other purpose, and the trees on such land shall constitute a grove;
(12) ‘holding’ means a parcel of land held under one tenure or
one lease, engagement or grant ;
(13) ‘improvement’, in relation to a holding, means any work
which adds materially to the value of the holding which is suitable
thereto and consistent with the purpose for which it is held and which,
if not executed on the holding, is either executed directly for its benefit
or is after execution, made directly beneficial to it, and, subject to the
foregoing provisions, includes—
(i) the construction of tanks, wells, water channels,
embankments and other works for storage, supply or distribution of
water for agricultural purposes ;
(ii) the construction of works for the drainage of land or for the
protection of land from floods or from erosion or other damage from
water ;
(iii) the planting of trees and the reclaiming, clearing, enclosing,
leveling or terracing of land ;
(iv) the erection of buildings on, or in the vicinity of the holding
elsewhere than in an abadi or urban area, required for the convenient
of profitable use or occupation of the holding ; and
(v) the renewal or reconstruction of any of the foregoing works,
or alteration therein or additions thereto ;
(14) ‘land’, except in Chapter VII and VIII and sections 80, 81
and section 136, means land held or occupied for purposes connected
with agriculture ;
(15) ‘land holder’ means the person to whom rent is or but for a
contract, express or implied would be payable ;
(16) ‘Revenue Court’ means all or any of the following
authorities (that is to say) the Board and all members thereof
Commissioners, Additional, Commissioners, Collectors, Additional
Collectors, [Chief Revenue Officers, Assistant Collectors, Settlement
Officers, Assistant Settlement Officers, Record Officers, Assistant
Record Officers, Tahsildars, Tahsildars (Judicial) and Naib
Tahsildars;].

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
[ (17) ‘Revenue Officer’ means the Commissioner, an Additional
Commissioner, the Collector an Additional Collector, the Chief Revenue
Officer, the Sub-Divisional Officer, an Assistant Collector, the
Settlement Officer, an Assistant Settlement Officer, the Record Officer,
an Assistant Record officer, the Tahsildar, the Tahsildar (Judicial), the
Naib Tahsildar and the Revenue Inspector. ]
(18) ‘Sub Divisional Officer’ means the Assistant Collector in
charge of the Tahsil ;
(19) ‘taungya plantation’ means the system of afforestation in
which the plantation of trees is, in the earlier stages, done
simultaneously with the cultivation of agricultural crops which ceases,
when trees so planted begin to form a canopy, rendering the
cultivation of agricultural crops impossible ;
(20) ‘village’ means any local area whether compact or
otherwise, recorded as a village in the revenue records of the district
concerned, and includes an area which the State Government may, by
general or special notification, declare to be a village.
(21) ‘village artisan’ means a person whose main source of
livelihood is manufacture or repair of traditional tools, implements and
other articles or things used for agriculture or purposes ancillary
thereto, and includes a carpenter, weaver, potter, blacksmith,
silversmith, goldsmith, barber, washermen, cobbler or any other
person who normally earns his livelihood by practicing a craft either by
his own labour or by labour of any member of his family in any village ;
(22) words and expressions [Gaon Fund] and [Gram Sabha
and Gram Panchayat] shall have the meanings assigned to them in the
U. P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 ;
[(23) ‘agricultural year’ means an year which begins from first
day of July and ends on thirtieth day of June of a calendar year. It is
also characterized as ‘fasli year’ ;
(24) ‘intermediary’ with reference to any estate means a
proprietor, under-proprietor, sub-proprietor, thekadar, permanent
lessee in Avadh and permanent tenure-holder of such estate or part
thereof ;
(25) ‘lease’ in relation to mines and minerals shall include a
sub-lease, a prospecting lease and an agreement to lease or sublet,
and ‘lessee’ shall be construed accordingly ;

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(26) ‘decree’ shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 2
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act no. V of 1908) ;
(27) ‘State Government’ means the State Government of Uttar
Pradesh ;
(28) ‘Central Government’ shall have the meaning assigned to it
in section 3 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (Act no. X of 1897) ;
(29) ‘Minjumla number’ means a shajra number denoting a
component part of a filed which has theoretically been partitioned but
physically has not been partitioned. ]
CHAPTER—II
Revenue Divisions
Division of
State into
revenue
areas 5. For the purposes of this Code [the State shall be divided
into revenue areas comprising divisions which may consist of one or
more districts, and each district may consist of two or more districts,
and each district may consist of two or more Tahsils and each Tahsil
may consist of one or more parganas, and each pargana may consist of
two or more villages. ]
Constitution
of revenue
areas 6. (1) The State Government may, by notification, specify —
(i) the districts which constitute a division ;
(ii) the tahsils which constitute a district ;
(iii) the villages which constitute a tahsil.
(2) The State Government may, by notification, alter the limits
of any revenue area referred to in sub-section (1) by amalgamation, readjustment, division or in any other manner whatsoever, or abolish
any such revenue area and may name and alter the name of any such
revenue area, and in any case where any area is renamed, then all
references in any law or instrument or other document to the area
under its original name shall be deemed to be references to the areas
renamed unless expressly provided otherwise :
Provided that before passing any order under this sub-section
on any proposal to alter the limits of any revenue area, the State
Government shall publish, in the prescribed, manner such proposals
for inviting objections, and shall take into consideration any objections
to such proposals.
(3) The Collector may, by an order, published in the prescribed
manner, arrange the villages in a tahsil into Lekhpal circles and the
Lekhpal circles into Revenue Inspector circles and specify also the
headquarters of each Revenue Inspector within his Circle.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(4) The divisions, districts, tahsils, pargana, Revenue Inspector
circles, Lekhpal circles and villages, as existing at the commencement
of this Code shall, until altered under the preceding sub-sections, be
deemed to be the revenue areas specified under this section.
CHAPTER—III
Board and the Revenue Officers
Board of
Revenue 7. (1) There shall be a Board of Revenue for Uttar Pradesh
consisting of a Chairman and such other members as the State
Government may, from time to time appoint :
Provided that the Board as constituted an functioning
immediately before the commencement of this Code shall be deemed to
be the Board constituted under this section.
(2) [ * * * * ]
(3) No person shall be qualified for appointment as :—
(a) an Administrative Member of the Board, unless he has held
an officer not lower in rank than that of a Commissioner,
(b) a Judicial Member of the Board, [unless he has held an
office not below the rank of a Collector.]
(4) The State Government may, at the time of making the
appointment or at any time subsequent thereto, designate any
member, as Judicial Member of the Board, and any such member shall
be allotted only judicial business.
Jurisdiction
of the Board 8. (1) The Board shall be the Chief Controlling Authority.
[(a) in all matters relating to disposal of cases, appeals or
revisions, ; and ]
(b) subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the
State Government, in all other matters provided in this Code.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board shall
exercise, perform and discharge powers, functions and duties
conferred upon it by or under this Code or any other law for the time
being in force.
(3) The State Government may authorize any member of the
Board to exercise, perform and discharge either generally or in respect
of any particular locality or matter, all or any of the powers, functions
and duties conferred or imposed on the Board.

——————————————————————————————————————————
1. Omit. by sec. 8(a) of U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Power to
distribute
business 9. (1) Subject to such rules or orders as the State Government
may make or issue, the Board may distribute its business amongst its
member as the Board may deem fit, Chairman may constitute bench or
benches consisting of more than one member for disposal of a
particular case or class of cases.
(2) All orders made or decrees passed by a member of the Board
in accordance with such distribution shall be deemed to be orders or
decrees, as the case may be, of the Board.
Decisions of
the Board 10. (1) Where any proceeding coming under the consideration
of the Board on appeal or in revision is heard by a Bench composed of
two or more members, the case shall be decided in accordance with the
opinion of such members or of the majority, if any, of such members.
(2) Where the members of the Board constituting the Bench are
equally divided in opinion as to the decision of a case, it shall be heard
by a larger Bench to be constituted by the Chairman, and the case
shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of the members
constituting such Bench or of the majority, if any, of such members.
(3) All decisions given by a member sitting singly or by a
Division Bench comprising two members or a larger Bench constituted
as aforesaid shall be deemed to be decisions of the Board.
Commissio ners
and Additional
Commissioners 11. (1) The State Government shall appoint in each division a
Commissioner, who shall, within his division, exercise the powers and
discharge the duties conferred and imposed on a Commissioner by or
under this code or any other law for the time [being in force, and shall
exercise authority over all the revenue officers in his division.]
(2) The State Government may appoint one or more Additional
Commissioners in one or more Divisions.
(3) An Additional Commissioner shall exercise such powers and
discharge such duties of Commissioner in such cases or classes of
cases as the State Government or in the absence of any direction from
the State Government, the Commissioner of the division may direct.
(4) The provisions of this Code and every other law for the time
being applicable to a Commissioner shall apply to the Additional
Commissioner when exercising powers or discharging any duties under
this section, as if he were the Commissioner of the Division.
[ (5) The State Government may, at the time of making the
appointment or at any time subsequent thereto, designate any
Additional Commissioner, as Additional Commissioner (Judicial), and
any such Additional Commissioner (Judicial) shall be allotted only
judicial business. Such an Additional Commissioner (Judicial shall

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
exercise such powers and discharge such duties of Commissioner in
such cases or classes of cases as the State Government, or in the
absence of any direction from the State Government, the
Commissioner of the Division, may direct. ]
Collectors
and
Additional
Collectors 12. (1) The State Government shall appoint, in each district a
Collector who shall be in charge of the revenue administration thereof
and shall exercise all the powers and discharge all the duties conferred
and imposed on a Collector by or under this Code or nay other law for
the time being in force.
(2) The State Government may appoint one or more Additional
Collectors in a district.
(3) An additional Collector shall, subject to the direction and
control of the State Government or of the Collector, exercise all powers
and discharge all duties of Collector.
(4) The provisions of this Code and every other law for the time
being applicable to the Collector shall apply to the Additional Collector
when exercising powers or discharging any duties under this section
as if he were the Collector of the district.
[ (5) The State Government may, at the time of making the
appointment or at any time subsequent thereto, designate any
Additional Collector, as Additional Collector (Judicial), and any such
Additional Collector (Judicial) shall be allotted only judicial business.
Such an Additional Collector (Judicial) shall exercise such powers and
discharge such duties of Collector in such cases or classes of cases at
the State Government, or in the absence of any direction from the
State Government, the Collector of the District, may direct. ]
SubDivisional
Officers and
Additional
SubDivisional
Officers 13. [ (1) The State Government may appoint in each district
as many persons as it thinks fit to be Assistant Collectors of the first or
second class. ]
[ (2) The State Government may place an Assistant Collector
first class in charge of one or more sub-divisions of a district, and such
an officer shall be called the Assistant Collector first class in charge of
a sub-divisional or a Sub-Divisional Officer. ]
(3) The officers referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
shall exercise all the powers and discharge all the duties conferred and
imposed upon them by or under this Code or any other law for the
time being in force subject to the control of the Collector.
(4) The State Government may designate an [Assistant
Collector first class] appointed to a district to be an Additional SubDivisional Officer for one or more tahsil of the district.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Code the Additional SubDivisional Officer shall exercise such powers and discharge such
duties of a Sub-Divisional Officer in such cases or classes of cases as
the State Government, or in the absence of any direction from the
State Government, the Collector may direct.
[ (6) The State Government may, at the time of making the
appointment or at any time subsequent thereto, designate any
Assistant Collector first class, as Sub-Divisional Officer (Judicial) for
one or more tahsils, and any such Sub-Divisional Officer (Judicial)
shall be allotted only judicial business. Such a Sub-Divisional Officer
(Judicial) shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties of a
Sub-Divisional Officer in such cases or classes of cases as the State
Government, or in the absence of any direction from the State
Government, the Collector, may direct. ]
Tahsildars
and
Tahsildars
Judicial 14. (1) The State Government may appoint in each district as
many persons as it thinks fit to be Tahsildars and Tahsildar Judicial.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Code the Tahsildar and
Tahsildar Judicial shall exercise such powers and discharge such
duties as the State Government or the Board, and in the absence of
any directions from the State Government or the Board the Collector
may direct.
NaibTahsildars 15. The State Government may appoint in each district as
many persons as it thinks fit to be Naib-Tahsildars who shall exercise
the power and perform the duties conferred or imposed on them by or
under this Code or under any other law for the time being in force.
Revenue
Inspectors
and Lekhpals 16. (1) The Collector may appoint in each tahsil one or more
Revenue Inspector for the proper supervision, maintenance and
correction of the village records, and for such other duties as the State
Government may, from time to time, by general or special order specify.
(2) The Collector may appoint in each tahsil, as many Lekhpals
for the preparation, maintenance and correction of the village records,
and for such other duties as the State Government may from time to
time by general or special order, specify.
Combination
of Office 17. It shall be lawful for the State Government or the authority
competent to appoint, as the case may be, to appoint one and the
same person, being otherwise competent according to law for any two
or more of the offices provided for in this Chapter or to confer upon an
officer of one denomination all or any of the powers or duties of any
other officer or officers within certain local limits or otherwise, as it
may deem expedient.
Recovery of
money, 18. (1) The Collector may in cases in which there is claim
outstanding on any revenue officer or on any person formerly employed

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
papers, and
other
Government
property. as such in his district for public money or papers or other property of
the State Government in his charge, by order, for reasons to be
recorded, require the money or the particular papers or property
detained to be delivered either immediately to the bearer of the said
order or to such person on such date and at such place as the order
may specify.
[ (2) If the officer or other person aforesaid does not comply as
directed, the Collector shall impose a penalty of two hundred and fifty
rupees each day till the direction is complied with, so however, total
amount of such penalty shall not exceed twenty five thousand rupees:
Provided that the officer or other person, as the case may be,
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of hearing before any penalty
is imposed on him. ]
(3) Imposition of penalty under sub-section (2) shall not bar the
prosecution for any offence or recovery of money, papers and other
government property under any law for the time being in force. ]
Other power
of Revenue
Officers 19. (1) When any power is exercisable or any duty is
dischargeable by any officer or authority under this Code, such power
or duty may be exercised or discharged by any superior officer or
authority as well.
(2) The revenue officers appointed under this Code shall,
subject to the control of the state Government, exercise such other
powers and discharge such other duties as the State Government may,
by any general or special order direct.
CHAPTER—IV
Boundaries and Boundary Marks
Fixation and
demarcation
of boundaries 20. (1) boundaries of all villages in the State and of all survey
numbers in a village shall be fixed and demarcated by boundary
marks.
(2) The boundary marks shall, subject to the provisions
hereinafter contained in this Chapter, be of such specifications and
shall be constructed and maintained in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Obligation
regarding
maintenance
and repair of
boundary
marks 21. (1) Every tenure-holder shall be responsible to maintain
and repair at his cost the boundary marks lawfully erected in his
holding or on the boundary thereof.
(2) The [Gram Panchayat] shall be responsible to maintain and
repair at its cost the boundary marks other than those mentioned in

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
sub-section (1), lawfully erected in the villages situate within its
jurisdiction.
Destruction
etc. of
boundary
marks 22. (1) If any boundary marks lawfully erected in a Lekhpal
circle is destroyed removed or damaged, then the concerned Lekhpal
shall be bound promptly to report the matter to the Naib Tehsildar.
(2) The Naib Tehsildar shall make an inquiry in respect of Such
report and shall submit his recommendation to the Sub-Divisional
Officer.
Power to
require
erection,
repair of
renewal of
boundary
marks 23. (1) The Sub-Divisional Officer may, on receipt of the
recommendations of the Naib Tahsildar under section 22, or otherwise,
require a [Gram Panchayat] in relation to a village and a tenure holder
in relation to his holding, to erect or restore proper boundary marks or
to repair or replace the same in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Where the [Gram Panchayat] or a tenure holder fails to
erect, restore, repair or replace the boundary marks as required under
sub-section (1), the Sub-Divisional Officer may cause such boundary
marks to be erected, restored, repaid or replaced as the case may be
and recover the cost thereof from such [Gram Panchayat] or the
tenure holder in the manner prescribed.
Disputes
regarding
boundaries 24. (1) The Sub-Divisional Officer may, on his own motion or
on an application made in this behalf by a person interested decide, by
summary inquiry, any dispute regarding boundaries on the basis of
existing survey map or, where they have been revised to accordance
with the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holidays Act,
1953, on the basis of such maps, but if this is not possible, the
boundaries shall be fixed on the basis of actual possession.
(2) If in the course of an inquiry into a dispute under subsection (1), the Sub-Divisional Officer is unable to satisfy himself as to
which party is in possession or if it is shown that possession shall
been obtained by wrongful dispossession of the lawful occupant, the
Sub-Divisional Officer shall—
(a) in the first case, ascertain by summary inquiry who is the
person best entitled to the property, and shall put such person in
possession ;
(b) in the second case, put the person so dispossessed in
possession and for that purpose use or cause to be used such force as
may be necessary and shall then fix the boundary accordingly.
(3) Every proceeding under this section shall, as far as possible,
be concluded by the Sub-Divisional Officer within [three months] from
the date of the application.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Sub-Divisional
Officer may prefer an appeal before the Commissioner within 30 days
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
of the date of such order. [The order of the Commissioner shall,
subject to the provisions of section 210, be final.]
Rights of way
and other
easements 25. In the event of any dispute arising as to the route by which
a tenure holder or an agricultural labourer shall have access to his
land or to the waste or pasture land of the village (other than by the
public roads paths or common land) or as to the source from or course
by which he may avail himself of irrigational facilities, the Tahsildar
may, after such local inquiry as may be considered necessary, decide
the matter with reference to the prevailing custom and with due regard
to the convenience of all the parties concerned. He may direct the
removal of such obstacle and may, for that purpose, use or cause to be
used such force as may be necessary and may recover the cost of such
removal from the person concerned in the manner prescribed.
Removal of
obstacle 26. If the Tehsildar finds that any obstacle impedes the free use
of a public road, path or common land of a village or obstructs the
road or water course or source of water, he may direct the removal of
such obstacle and may, for that purpose, use or cause to be used such
force as may be necessary and may recover the cost of such removal
from the person concerned in the manner prescribed.
Revisional
powers of
SubDivisional
Officer 27. The Sub-Divisional Officer may call for the record of any
case decided by the Tahsildar under section 25 or 26, for the purpose
of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of such decision, and
may, after affording opportunity of hearing to the parties concerned
pass such orders as he thinks fit [:]
[Provided that no application under this section shall be
entertained after the expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of
the order sought to be revised. ]
Order not to
debar from
establishing
any right of
easement 28. No order made under this Chapter shall debar any person
from establishing such right of casement or customary right as he may
claim by a civil suit.
CHAPTER—V
Maintenance of village records
List of
villages 29. (1) The Collector shall prepare and maintain a register in
the form prescribed, containing list of all villages in his district and
shall show therein—

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(a) the areas which are liable to fluvial action ;
(b) the areas which have precarious cultivation ; and
(c) such other particular as may be prescribed.
(2) The register shall be revised every five years or at such
longer intervals as may be prescribed.
Maintenance
of Map and
Field Book 30. (1) The Collector shall maintain, in the manner prescribed,
a map and a field book (khasra) for each such village and shall cause
to be recorded therein, annually, or at such longer intervals as may be
prescribed, all changes in the boundaries of the village or survey
numbers, and shall also cause to be corrected, any errors or omissions
which are, from time to time, detected in such map or field book
(khasra).
[ (2) The minjumla number shall be divided physically in the
manner prescribed and revenue records including map and khasra
shall be corrected accordingly.]
Record of
Rights 31. (1) The Collector shall maintain, in the form and manner
prescribed, a record of rights (Khatauli) for each village, which shall
contain the following particulars, namely —
(a) the names of all tenure holders together with survey
numbers or plot numbers held by them and their areas.
(b) the nature or extent of the [respective interests including
shares] of such persons and the conditions or liabilities, if any,
attaching thereto ;
(c) the rent or revenue, if any, payable by or to any such
person.
(d) particulars of all land (other than holdings) belonging to or
vested in the [State Government, Central Government, Gram
Panchayat] or a local authority.
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed.
[ (2) Shares of the co-tenure holders shall be determined in the
manner prescribed. ]
Correction of
records 32. (1) Subject to the control of the Collector, the SubDivisional Officer the Tahsildar, or the Revenue Inspector shall record,
in the manner hereinafter provided in this Chapter, all changes in the
record of rights (Khatauni), the field book (Khasra) and the map that
may take place, and all transactions that may affect any of the rights
or interests recorded, and correct therein any error proved to have
been made in the records previously prepared :

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
[ Provided that order for correction in map shall be passed by
the Collector. ]
(2) No application for correction of error under sub-section (1)
where the claim is based solely on possession as well as involving
intricate question of title shall be maintainable.
Mutation in
cases of
succession 33. (1) Every person obtaining possession of any land by
succession shall submit report of such succession to the Revenue
Inspector of the circle in which the land is situate in such form as may
be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of a report under sub-section (1) or on facts
otherwise coming to his knowledge the Revenue Inspector shall—
(a) if the case is not disputed, record such succession in the
record of rights (Khatauni) ;
(b) in any other case, make such inquiry as may appear to him
to be necessary and submit his report to the Tehsildar.
[(3)] Any person whose name has not been recorded by
Revenue Inspector or is aggrieved by the order passed by the Revenue
Inspector under [under clause (a) or (b) of sub-section (2)] may move
an application before Tehsildar.
[(4)] The provisions of this section shall mutatis mutandis
apply to every person admitted as Bhumidhar with non-transferable
rights or as an asami by the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti in accordance
with the provisions of this Code or any enanctment repealed by it.
Duty to
report in
cases of
transfer 34. (1) Every person obtaining possession of any land by
transfer, other than transfer referred to in sub-section (3) of section 33
shall report such transfer, in the manner prescribed, to the Tahsildar
of the Tahsil in which the land is situate.
Explanation: — For the purposes of this section, the word
transfer includes a family settlement [***]
[ (2) State Government may fix a scale of fees for getting entry
recorded in the record of rights on the basis of transfer. A fee in
respect of any such entry shall be payable by the person in whose
favour the entry as to be made. ]

——————————————————————————————————————————
2. Renumbered and Substituted by sec. 25(a) of U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
3. Renumbered and Substituted by sec. 25(b) of U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
4. Omit. by sec. 26(b) of U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Mutation in
cases of
succession or
transfer 35. (1) On the receipt of a report under section 33 or section 34, or
upon facts otherwise coming to his knowledge, the Tahsildar shall
issue a proclamation and make such inquiry as appears to be
necessary and—
(a) if the case is not disputed, he shall direct the record of
rights (Khatauni) to be amended accordingly ;
(b) [ * * * * ]
[ (c) if the case is disputed, he shall decide the dispute and
direct, if necessary, the record of rights (Khatauni) to be amended
accordingly. ]
[ (2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Tahsildar under
sub-section (1) may prefer an appeal to the Sub-Divisional Officer
within a period of thirty days from the date of such order. ]
Intimation of
transfer and
deposit of
land revenue 36. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34,
where any document purporting to create, assign or extinguish any
title to or any charge on land or in respect of which a record of rights
(Khatauni) is prepared, is registered under the ‘‘Registration Act, 1908’’
the registering authority shall send intimation to the Tahsildar within
whose jurisdiction such land is situate in such form and within such
time as may be proscribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter no
order for correction of records under section 32 and no order for
recording succession under section 33 and no amendment of record of
rights (Khatauni) under section 35 and no correction under section 38
shall be recorded, unless the amount of land revenue due up-to-date
in respect of the land to which such order relates has been deposited.
Bar against
certain suits 37. No suit or other proceeding shall lie in any revenue court at
the instance of any person obtaining possession of any land by
succession or transfer, until he has made a report under section 33 or
Correction of
errors and
omission 38. (1) An application for correction of any error or omission in
the map, field-book (khasra) or record of rights (Khatauni) shall be
made to the Tahsildar in the manner prescribed.
[ (2) On receiving an application under sub-section (1) or on
any error or omission otherwise coming to his knowledge, the
Tahsildar shall make such inquiry as may appear to him to be
necessary, and refer the case along with his report to the Collector in
the case of map correction and to the Sub-Divisional Officer in matter
of other correction.
——————————————————————————————————————————
1. Omit. by sec. 27(a)(i) of U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(3) The case shall be decided by the Collector or the Sub
Divisional Officer as the case may be, after considering any objection
filed and evidence produced before him or before the Tahsildar.
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Collector or the
Sub-Divisional Officer, as the case may be, under sub-section (3) may
prefer an appeal to the Commissioner within a period of thirty days
from the date of such order, and [The decision of the Commissioner
shall, subject to the provisions of section 210, be final].]
[ (5) Any forged or manipulated entry in the map, the khasra
or the record of rights (Khatauni) may be expunged under this section.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in other provisions of
this Code, the Revenue Inspector may correct any undisputed error or
omission in the record of rights (Khatauni) or Khasra in such manner
and after making such inquiry, as may be prescribed. ]
Explanation :— The power to correct any error or omission
under this section shall not be construed to include the power to
decide a dispute involving question of title.
Certain
orders of
revenue
officers not
to debar a
suit 39. No order passed by a Revenue Inspector under section 33,
or by a Tahsildar under sub-section (1) of section 35 or by a SubDivisional Officer under sub-section (3) of section 38 or by a
Commissioner under [sub-section (4) of section 38] shall debar any
person from establishing his rights to the land by means of a suit
under section 144.
Presumption
as to entries 40. All entries [in the record of right (Khatauni)] prepared in
accordance with the provisions of this Code shall be presumed to be
true, until the contrary is proved.
Kisan Bahi 41. (1) Every time when a record of rights (Khatauni) is
prepared under this Chapter, the Collector shall as soon as may
because to be supplied to every tenure-holder a Kisan Bahi containing
such particulars as may be prescribed.
(2) The Kisan Bahi shall be a consolidated pass-book for all the
holdings held by a tenure-holder in the district.
(3) In the case of a joint holding, it shall be sufficient for the
purpose of this section if Kisan Bahi is supplied only to such one or
more of the recorded co-tenure holders as may apply for it.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(4) The tenure holder shall be liable to pay such cost for the
Kisan Bahi and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Every person holding Kisan Bahi shall, from time to time, be
entitled, without any extra payment, to get the amendments made in
the record of rights (Khatauni) incorporated in his Kisan Bahi.
(6) Whenever a bank or other public financial institution
advances loan to a tenure holder on the basis of a representation of the
tenure holder that he is a holder of the holdings recorded in the Kisan
Bahi, it shall endorse the details of the loan so advanced in the Kisan
Bahi. [* * *]
(7) The tenure holder shall also submit to such bank or other
financial institution an affidavit declaring that he has not taken any
other loan (which remains wholly or partly unpaid) on the security of
the holdings comprised in the Kisan Bahi nor has he transferred the
holding or any share therein to any person in any other manner
whatsoever.
(8) Any tenure holder who in such an affidavit makes any
statement which is false and which he either knows or believes to be
false or does not believe to be true, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years and shall, also be liable to fine.
(9) Such bank or other financial institution shall also endorse
the final repayment of the loan on the Kisan Bahi.
Duty to
produce
information
or documents 42. Every person whose rights, interests or obligations are
required to be or have been entered in any record or register
maintained under this Chapter shall be bound, on the requisition of
any revenue officer engaged in compiling or revising such record or
register, to furnish or produce for his inspection, within such time as
may be specified, all such information or documents needed for the
correct compilation or revision thereof as may be within his knowledge
or in his possession or power.
CHAPTER—VI
Revision of village records
Notification
of record and
survey
operations 43. (1) Whenever the State Government is of opinion that in
any district or other local area, a revision of records or a re-survey, or
both is necessary, it shall publish a notification to that effect and
thereupon such district or area shall be deemed to be under record
operation or survey operation or both, as the case may be.

——————————————————————————————————————————
1. Omit. by sec. 32(c) of U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
[ (2) The State Government may, by notification in the gazette,
order that a survey operation or a record operation of abadi or village
abadi or village abadi or both shall be made in the manner prescribed.]
[ (3) The State Government may, by a subsequent notification,
amend or cancel the notification issued under sub-section (1) or subsection (2), or declare the operation to be closed. ]
Record
Officer and
Assistant
Record
Officer 44. (1) The State Government may appoint a Record Officer
who shall be incharge of the record operation or the survey operation
or both and may also appoint as many Assistant Record Officers as it
may deem fit.
(2) The Assistant Record Officer shall, for so long as the
notification under [sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 43] is
in force, exercise the powers conferred on him by this Code and shall
discharge such other duties as may be entrusted to him by the Record
Officer.
Power of
Record
Officer
during record
or survey
operation 45. Where any district or other local area is under record or
survey operation, the powers conferred by sections 23 to 26 shall be
exercised by the Record Officer.
Revisions of
records
during record
operation 46. When any district or other local area is under record
operation, the Record Officer shall cause to be revised, for each village
comprised therein, the field book (khasra) and [the record of rights
(Khatauni) or the record of abadi or village abadi].
Revision of
records
during survey
operation 47. When any district or other local area is under survey
operation the Record Officer shall cause to be prepared for each village
comprised therein, a map and thereafter, proceed to revise [the field
book (Khasra) and the record of rights (Khatauni) or the record of
abadi or village abadi, as the case may be].
Powers of
Record
Officer as to
erection of
boundary
marks 48. When any local area is under survey operation the Record
Officer may issue a proclamation directing all [Gram Panchayat] and
Bhumidhars to erect, within fifteen days such boundary marks, as he
may think necessary to define the limits of the villages and fields and
in default, he may cause such boundary marks to be erected, and the
Collector shall recover the cost of their erection from the [Gram
Panchayats] or Bhumidhars concerned.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Procedure of
revision of
map and
records 49. (1) For revising the map and records under sections 46 and
47, the Record Officer shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections
(2) to (8), cause to be carried out survey, map correction, field to field
partal and test and verification of current record of rights (Khatauni) in
accordance with the procedure prescribed.
(2) After the test and verification of the current record of rights,
the Naib Tahsildar shall correct clerical mistakes and errors, if any, in
such records, and shall cause to be issued to the concerned tenure
holders and other persons interested, notices containing relevant
extracts from the current record of rights and such other records as
may be prescribed showing their rights and liabilities in relation to
land and mistakes and disputes discovered during the operations
mentioned in sub-section (1).
(3) Any person to whom notice under sub-section (2) has been
issued may within twenty, one days of the receipt of notice, file before
the Naib-Tahsildar objections in respect thereof disputing the
correctness or nature of the entries in such records or extracts.
(4) Any person interested in the land may also file objection
before the Naib-Tahsildar at any time before the dispute is settled in
accordance with sub-section (5) or before the Assistant Record Officer,
at any time before the objections are decided in accordance with
subsection (6).
(5) The Naib-Tahsildar shall—
(a) where objections are filed in accordance with sub-section (3)
or sub-section (4) after hearing the parties concerned ; and
(b) in any other case, after making such inquiry as he may
deem necessary, correct the mistake, and settle the dispute by
conciliation between the parties appearing before him, and pass orders
on the basis of such conciliation.
(6) The record of all cases which cannot be disposed of by the
Naib-Tahsildar by conciliation as required by sub-section (5), shall be
forwarded to the Assistant Record Officer who shall dispose of the
same, in accordance with the procedure laid down in section 24 and
where the dispute involves a question of title, he shall decide the same
after a summary inquiry.
(7) Where after the summary inquiry under sub-section (6), the
Assistant Record Officer is satisfied that the land in dispute belongs to
the State Government or a local authority, he shall cause the person in
unauthorized occupation of such land to be evicted and may, for that
purpose, use or cause to be used such force as may be necessary.
(8) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Assistant Record
Officer made under sub-section (6) or sub-section (7) [may prefer an

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
appeal within thirty days from the date of such order to the Record
Officer in the manner prescribed] and every order of the Record Officer
on such appeal shall, subject to the provisions of section 210, be final.
Finalization
of record of
rights 50. After the revision of map or records in accordance with
record of rights (Khatauni) under his dated signature.
Preparation
of new record
of rights 51. The assistant Record Officer shall thereafter prepare, for
each village in the area under the record or survey operation, the
records specified in sections 30 and 31 on the basis of the record of
rights (Khatauni) referred to in section 50 and the records so prepared
shall be maintained by the Collector in place of the records previously
existing.
Procedure for
villages
where no
records are
available 52. (1) The provision of this Chapter shall, mutatis mutandis
apply to a record operation or survey operation in respect of every such
village or part thereof, where no map or other record referred to in
Officer shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.
[ (2) The provisions of this Chapter shall, mutatis mutandis ,
apply to record operation and survey operation of abadi or village
abadi. ]
Presumption
as to the
entries 53. All entries in the record of rights (Khatauni) prepared in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be presumed to be
true until the contrary is proved.
CHAPTER—VII
Ownership of Land and other Properties
Title of State
in all lands
etc. 54. All public roads, lanes and paths, bridges, ditches, dykes
and fences on or beside them, the bed of rivers, streams, nallas, lakes,
ponds and tanks and all canals and water channels, and all standing
and flowing water, and all lands wherever situated, which are not
owned by any person, and except in so far as any rights of any persons
may be established in or over the same, and except as may be
otherwise provided in any law for the time being in force, are hereby
declared, with all rights in or over the same, or appertaining thereto, to
be the property of the State Government :
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect
the rights of any person subsisting in any such property immediately
before the date of commencement of this Code.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Mines and
minerals 55. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, the
right to operate or work in any mine or to extract any mineral there
from shall be governed by the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957.
[ (2) Every lessee of building or land, leased or deemed to have
been leased out by the State Government under any of the enactments
repealed by this Code, for the purposes connected with the working or
extraction of any mine or mineral, and operating on the date of
commencement of this Code, shall, subject to the terms and conditions
of the lease aforesaid, continue to retain possession thereof on
payment of such rent as was in force on the date of such
commencement. ]
Rights in
trees 56. (1) All trees existing on any holding or grove shall, subject
to the provisions of this Code or any other law for the time being in
force, be deemed to belong to the person who holds such holding or
grove.
(2) All trees existing on the boundary of any holdings shall be
deemed to belong jointly to the persons who hold the holdings on
either side of such boundary.
(3) All trees in abadi or in any unoccupied land belonging to or
held by any person immediately before the date of commencement of is
Code shall continue to belong to such person and be held subject to
any other law for the time being in force and to any rules made under
this Code.
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 57, all trees, brushwood,
jungle or other natural product, wherever growing or planted, other
than the trees referred to in sub-sections (1) to (3) shall, with effect
from the date of commencement of this Code be deemed to be the
property of the State Government.
Explanation —For the purposes of this section, and section 59,
the expression ‘unoccupied land’ means the land in a village other
than the land held by tenure-holders.
Fruit bearing
trees 57. (1) Where before the commencement of this Code, any fruit
bearing tree was planted by any person on either side of any public
road or path or canal with the permission in writing of any revenue
officer or an officer of the Forest or Public Works Department or
Irrigation Department of the State Government, not below the rank of a
Tahsildar or an Assistant conservator of Forest or an Assistant
Engineer, as the case may be, then notwithstanding that such land
vests in the State Government, such person and his legal
representatives shall be entitled to the fruits of such trees without
payment of any charges whatsoever.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(2) Any person desiring to plant a fruit bearing tree after the
commencement of this Code, on either side of any public road or path
or canal may do so with the permission in writing of the Collector or
any other officer authorized by the State Government in this behalf
and the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to the trees so
planted.
(3) The right conferred under this section shall be heritable but
the person planting the fruit bearing tree or his heirs shall have no
right to the corpus of such tree or in the land on which it stands.
Disputes to
be decided by
Collector 58. (1) Where any dispute arises in respect of any property
referred to in section 54 or section 56 or section 57 or in respect of any
right to such property, such dispute shall be decided by the Collector.
(2) Any person aggrieved by any order passed under subsection (1) may file an appeal before the Commissioner within [thirty
days] from the date of order.
CHAPTER—VIII
Management of Land and other Properties
by [Gram Panchayat] or other Local Authority
Entrustment
of land etc.
to [Gram
Panchayats]
and other
local
authorities 59. (1) The State Government may, by general or special order
to be published in the manner prescribed, entrust all or any of the
things specified in sub-section (2), which vest in the State Government,
to a [Gram Panchayat] or other local authority for the purposes of
superintendence, preservation, management and control in accordance
with the provisions of this code.
(2) The following things may be entrusted to a [Gram
Panchayat] or other local authority under sub-section (1), namely —
(i) lands, whether cultivable or otherwise, except land for the
time being comprised in any holding or grove ;
(ii) grove standing on the [Gram Panchayat] land, pasture land,
graveyard, cremation-ground, manure pits, Khaliyans, Chakroads, link
roads, sector roads, land in river bed, road, Sadak Khanti, Sullage
farm ;
(iii) forests ; and fisheries ;
(iv) trees, other than trees in a holding or on the boundary of a
holding or in a grove or abadi, or any trees on unoccupied land ;
(v) hats, bazars, melas, tanks, ponds, water-channels, private
ferries, pathways, and abadi sites ;

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(vi) subject to the provision of the Treasure Trove Act, 1878,
any properties specified in section 55 and belonging to the State
Government.
(3) Every land or other thing—
(a) vested in a [Gram Panchayat] or any other local authority
under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings
Act, 1953 or the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land
Holdings Act, 1960 ;
(b) placed under the charge of a [Gram Panchayat] or any
other local authority under any of the enactments repealed by this
Code ;
(c) otherwise coming into possession of a [Gram Panchayat]
or other local authority, either before or after the commencement of
this Code ;
shall be deemed to be entrusted to such [Gram Panchayat] or other
local authority, as the case may be, with effect from the date of
commencement of this Code or from the date of such coming into its
possession, for the purpose of superintendence, preservation,
management and control, in accordance with the provisions of this
Code.
(4) The State Government may, by a subsequent order to be
published in the manner prescribed,—
[(a) (i) add to, amend, vary or rescind any earlier order issued
under sub-section (1);
(ii) convert any land entrusted or deemed to be entrusted or
transferred to any Gram Panchayat or local authority, which is not
covered under sub-section (1) of section 77 to a land covered under
sub-section (1) of section 77.]
(b) transfer to any other [Gram Panchayats] or other local
authority, any land or other thing entrusted or deemed to be
entrusted under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) for
superintendence, preservation, management and control ;
[(c) (i) resume any land or other thing so entrusted or deemed
to be entrusted or transferred to any Gram Panchayat or local
authority on such terms and conditions as prescribed.
(ii) add to, amend, vary or rescind any earlier order issued
under clause (i);]
(d) impose conditions and restrictions subject to which the
powers of superintendence, preservation, management and control
under this section shall be exercised.
(5) Where any of the things specified in sub-section (2) has
been entrusted or deemed to have been entrusted to a [Gram
Panchayat], and the village or any part thereof in which such things
are situated lies outside the circle of the [Gram Panchayat], such
[Gram Panchayat] or its Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti shall, subject to
any general or special order issued by the State Government in this
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
behalf, perform, discharge and exercise the functions, duties and
powers, assigned, imposed or conferred by or under this Code or the
U. P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 on a [Gram Panchayat] or a Bhumi
Prabandhak Samiti as if that village or part also lay within that circle.
(6) Where any of the things specified under sub-section (2) has
been entrusted or deemed to be entrusted to a local authority other
than the [Gram Panchayat], the provisions of this Chapter shall
mutatis mutandis apply to such local authority.
[Explanation : For the purpose of this section the word
‘‘Local Authority’’ includes Kshetra Panchayat, Zila Panchayat, Town
Area, Notified Area, Cantonment Area, Nagar Panchayat, Nagar
Palika, Nagar Mahapalika, Nagar Nigam, Noida Vikas Pradhikaran,
Greater Noida Vikas Pradhikaran, Yamuna Expressway Vikas
Pradhikaran or any Industrial township declared as an Industrial
Development Area under the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area
Development Act, 1976 under Article 243-Q of the Constitution of
India.]
Superintendence,
management and
control by Bhumi
Prabandhak
Samiti 60. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Code, every Bhumi
Prabandhak Samiti shall be charged, for and on behalf of the [Gram
Panchayat], with the superintendence, preservation, management
and control of all land and other things entrusted or deemed to be
entrusted to that [Gram Panchayat] under section 59 or over which
such [Gram Panchayat] is entitled to take possession under this
Code or any other law for the time being in force.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality and management of
land;
(a) the settlement and management of land ;
[(b) the preservation, maintenance and development of forests
trees ; and pastures.]
(c) the maintenance and development of abadi sites and village
communications ;
(d) the management of hats, bazars and meals ;
(e) the maintenance and development of fisheries and tanks ;
(f) the development of cottage industries ;
(g) the development and improvement of agriculture ;
(h) the conduct and prosecution of suits and proceedings by
or against the [Gram Panchayats] ; and
(i) such other matters as may be prescribed ;
Management of
village tanks 61. Where a tank in any village is entrusted or deemed to be
entrusted to any [Gram Panchayat] under section 59, then,
notwithstanding anything contained in any contract or grant or any
law for the time being in force, its management by such [Gram
Panchayat] shall be regulated by the following conditions, namely :—
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(a) where the area of the tank measures 0.5 acre, the Bhumi
Prabandhak samiti shall, with the previous approved of the SubDivisional Officer, let it out in the manner prescribed.
(b) where the area of the tank exceeds 0.5 acre. the Bhumi
Prabandhak samiti shall, with the previous approval of the SubDivisional Officer, let it out in the manner prescribed.
Explanation —For the purpose of this section, the term ‘tank’,
includes talab, pond, pokhar and other land covered with water.
Conduct of
suits and
legal
proceedings 62. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and such
other conditions as may be prescribed, the Chairman or such members
of the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti as may be authorized in this behalf
by such Samiti, may sign any document and do all other things for the
proper conduct and prosecution of suits and other proceedings for and
on behalf of the [Gram Panchayat].
(2) No suit or other proceedings to which any [Gram
Panchayat] is a party shall be compromised or withdrawal on behalf of
such [Gram Panchayat], unless such compromise or withdrawal is
approved by a resolution of the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti and prior
sanction of the Sub-Divisional Officer is obtained.
Land which
may be
allotted for
abadi sites 63. (1) The Sub-Divisional officer may of his own motion or on
the resolution of the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti earmark the following
classes of land for the provision of abadi sites for allotment to persons
specified in section 64 :—
(a) all lands entrusted or deemed to been trusted to a [Gram
Panchayat] under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 59 ;
(b) all lands coming into possession of [Gram Panchayat]
under any other provision of this Code ;
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision
of this Code or in the U. P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947, the Bhumi
Prabandhak Samiti may, with the previous approval of the SubDivisional Officer, allot the following classes of land for the purposes of
building houses :—
(a) [any vacant land referred to in sub-section (1) ] ;
(b) any land earmarked for abadi sites under the Uttar Pradesh
Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 ;

[(c) any land acquired under the provisions of Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 (Act no. 1 of 1894) and The Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Act, 2013 (Act no. 30 of 2013)].
Allotment of
abadi sites 64. (1) The following order of preference shall be observed in
making allotment of land referred to section 63 :—

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(a) an agricultural labourer or a village artisan residing in the
[Gram Sabha] and belonging to a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe
or other backward Classes or a person of general category living below
poverty line as determined by the State Government.
(b) any other agricultural labourer or a village artisan residing
in the [Gram Sabha].
(c) any other person residing in the [Gram Sabha] and
belonging to a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe or other Backward
Classes or a person of general category living below poverty line as
determined by the State Government ;
Provided that preference will be given to widow and physically
handicapped person within same category.
Explanation —For the purposes of this sub-section —
(1) “other backward class” means the backward classes of
citizens specified in Schedule-1 of the Uttar Pradesh Public
Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994 (U. P. Act No. 4 of
1994) ;
(2) “person of general category living below poverty line”
means such persons as may be determined from time to time
by the State Government.
(2) In making an allotment under this section, preference shall
be given to a person who either holds no house or has insufficient
accommodation considering the requirement of his family.
(3) Every land allotted under this section shall be held by the
allottee on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed [:]
[ Provided that if the allottee is a married man and his wife is
alive she shall be co-allottee of equal share in the and so allotted. ]
Delivery of
possession to
allottee 65. (1) Where any land referred to in section 63 has been
allotted for building a house under section 64, and any person other
than an allottee is in occupation of such land in contravention of the
provisions of this Code, the Sub-Divisional Officer may, of his own
motion and shall, on the application of the allottee, put the allottee in
possession of such land, and may, for that purpose, use or cause to be
used such force as he may consider necessary.
(2) Where any person, after being evicted under this section,
reoccupies the land or any part thereof, without lawful authority, he
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years but which shall not be less than three months and also with
fine which may extend to three thousand rupees.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Provided that the court convicting the accused may, while
passing the sentence, direct that the whole or such portion of the fine
that may be recovered as the court considers proper be paid to the
allottee as damages for use and occupation.
(3) Where in any proceeding under sub-section (2), the court, at
any stage after cognizance of the case has been taken, is satisfied by
affidavit or otherwise that—
(a) the accused is in occupation of the land to which such
proceeding relates, in contravention of the provisions of this Code, and
(b) the allottee is entitled to the possession of such land.
the court may, summarily, evict the accused from such land pending
the final determination of the case, and, may put the allottee in
possession of such land.
(4) Where in any proceeding under sub-section (2), the accused
is convicted, the interim order passed under sub-section (3) shall be
confirmed by the court.
(5) Where, in any proceeding under sub-section (2), the accused
is acquitted or discharged and the court is satisfied that the person so
acquitted or discharged is entitled to be put back in possession over
such land, the court shall, on the application of such person, direct
that delivery of possession be made to him.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, an offence under sub-section (2) may be tried
summarily.
(7) For the purpose of speedy trial of offences under this
section, the State Government, may in consultation with the High
Court, by notification constitute special courts each consisting of an
officer not below the rank of Sub-Divisional Magistrate, who shall,
subject to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
exercise, in relation to such offence, the powers of a Judicial
Magistrate of the First Class.

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, every offence punishable under sub-section (2) shall
be cognizable and non-bailable.

[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Inquiry into
irregular
allotment of
abadi sites 66. (1) The Collector may, of his own motion and shall, on the
application of any person aggrieved by an allotment of land made
under section 64, inquire in the manner prescribed of such allotment
and if he is satisfied that the allotment is irregular, he may cancel the
allotment, and thereupon, the right, title and interest of the allottee
and of every other person claiming through him in the land allotted
shall cease.
(2) No application under sub-section (1) shall be entertained, if
it is made after the expiration of a period of three years from the date
of allotment.
(3) [Every order of the Collector made under this section shall,
subject to the provisions of section 210, be final.]
Power to
prevent
damage,
misappropriation and
wrongful
occupation of
[Gram
Panchayats]
property 67. (1) Where any property entrusted or deemed to be
entrusted under the provisions of this Code to a [Gram Panchayats] or
other local authority is damaged or misappropriated, or where any
[Gram Panchayat] or other authority is entitled to take possession of
any land under the provisions of this Code and such land is occupied
otherwise than in accordance with the said provisions, the Bhumi
Prabandhak Samiti or other authority or the Lekhpal concerned, as the
case may be, shall inform the [Assistant Collector] concerned in the
manner prescribed.
[ (2) Where from the information received under sub-section (1)
or otherwise, the Assistant Collector is satisfied that any property
referred to in sub-section (1) has been damaged or misappropriated, or
any person is in occupation of any land referred to in that sub-section
in contravention of the provisions of this Code, he shall issue notice to
the person concerned to show cause why compensation for damage,
misappropriation or wrongful occupation not exceeding the amount
specified in the notice be not recovered from him and why he should
not be evicted from such land. ]
(3) If the person to whom a notice has been issued under subsection (2) fails to show cause within the time specified in the notice or
within such extended time as the [Assistant Collector] may allow in
this behalf, or if the cause shown is found to be insufficient, the
[Assistant Collector] may direct that such person shall be evicted from
the land, and may, for that purpose, use or cause to be used such
force as may be necessary, and may direct that the amount of
compensation for damage or misappropriation of the property or for
wrongful occupation as the case may be, be recovered from such
person as arrears of land revenue.
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(4) If the Sub-Divisional Officer is of opinion that the person
showing cause is not guilty of causing the damage or misappropriation
or wrongful occupation referred to in the notice under sub-section (2),
he shall discharge the notice.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Sub-Divisional
Officer under Sub-section (3) or Sub-section (4), may within thirty days
from the date of such order prefer an appeal to the Collector.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision
of this Code, and subject to the provisions of this section every order of
the Sub-Divisional Officer under this section shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-sections (5) be final.
(7) The procedure to be followed in any action taken under this
section shall be such as may be prescribed.
Explanation —For the purpose of this section, the word “land”
shall include the trees and buildings standing thereon.
[ 67-A. Certain house sites to be settled with existing owners
thereof. – (1) If any person referred to in sub-section (1) of section 64
has built a house on any land referred to in section 63 of this Code,
not being land reserved for any public purpose, and such house exists
on the November 29, 2012, the site of such house shall be held by the
owner of the house on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(2) Where any person referred to in sub-section (1) of section
64, has built a house on any land held by a tenure holder (not being a
government lessee ) and such house exists on November 29, 2000, the
site of such house, notwithstanding anything contained in this Code,
be deemed to be settled with the owner of such house by the tenure
holder on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
Explanation : —For the purpose of sub-section (2), a house
existing on November 29, 2000, on any land held by a tenure holder,
shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to have been built by
the occupant thereof and where the occupants are members of one
family by the head of that family. ]
Gaon Fund 68. (1) All sums received under this Code by a [Gram Sabha],
Gram Panchayat or a Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti shall be credited to
the Gaon Fund :
Provided that the amount of damages or compensation recovered
under section 67 shall be credited to the Consolidated Gaon Fund.
(2) the Gaon Fund constituted under the enactments repealed
by this Code and subsisting immediately before the commencement of
such Code shall be deemed to have been constituted under this
section.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(3) The [Gaon Fund] shall be operated in such manner and
shall be applied for such purposes as may be prescribed.
Consolidated
Gaon Fund 69. (1) There shall be established for each district a
Consolidated Gaon Fund to which the following amounts shall be
credited, namely —
(a) the amount referred to in the proviso to sub-section (1) of
(b) all contributions received by the Collector under sub-section
(2) ;
(c) such other amounts as may be prescribed.
(2) Every [Gram Panchayats] in a district shall pay to the
Collector annually such percentage, not exceeding twenty five as the
State Government may from time to time notify of the total amount
credited to the Gaon Fund under section 67, in the manner prescribed.
(3) The Consolidated Gaon Fund shall be operated by the
Collector and may be applied for the following purposes namely —
(a) the payment of fees and allowances, if any, of the lawyers
appointed under section 72 ;
(b) the payment of expenses incurred in connection with the
conduct and prosecution of suits, applications or other proceedings by
or against the [Gram Panchayats] or the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti
under this Code ;
[ (c) The payment of expenses incurred on protection,
preservation and development of lands of common utility ; and ]
(d) the payment of any other sum which the State Government
may, by general or special order, declare to be an appropriate charge
on such fund.
(4) The Consolidated Gaon Funds constituted under any of the
enactments repealed by this Code and subsisting immediately before
its commencement shall be deemed to have been constituted under
this section.
[ (5) The State Government may, by notification in the gazette,
direct that a consolidated Gaon Fund shall be established also for each
Tahsil for the purpose and in the manner prescribed. ]
Orders and
direction of
the State
Government
and the
Collector 70. (1) The State Government and, subject to its control, the
Collector may issue such orders or directions to the Bhumi
Prabandhak Samiti as may appear to be necessary for purposes of this
Code.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(2) It shall be the duty of the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti and its
office bearers to forthwith carry out the orders and comply with the
directions issued under sub-section (1).
Alternative
arrangement 71. If at any time the Collector is satisfied that—
(a) the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti has failed without reasonable
cause or excuse to discharge its duties or to perform the function
imposed or assigned to it by or under this Code ; or
(b) circumstances have so arisen that the Bhumi Prabandhak
Samiti is or may be rendered unable to discharge the duties or perform
the functions imposed or assigned by or under this Code ; or
(c) it is otherwise expedient or necessary to do so; he may,
direct that the duties, powers and functions of such Bhumi
Prabandhak Samiti under this Code, shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force, be discharged,
exercised and performed by an officer not below the rank of a NaibTahsildar and for such period and subject to such restrictions as may
be specified.
[ Provided that reasonable opportunity of hearing shall be
given to the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti before issuing any direction
under this section. ]
Standing
counsel and
other lawyers 72. (1) The State Government may, on such terms and
conditions and in such manner as may be prescribed appoint —
(a) [one or more Standing Counsel (Revenue)] each at
Allahabad High Court and Lucknow Bench thereof ;
(b) [one or more Standing Counsel (Revenue)] each for Board of
Revenue Allahabad and Lucknow ;
[ (c) one or more Divisional Government Counsel (Revenue) for
the divisional head-quarters who shall also look after the work related
to Circuit Courts of the Board, (wherever Circuit Courts exist at
division level) and ]
(d) [one District Government Counsel (Revenue) and one or
more Additional District Government Counsel (Revenue) for the district
head-quarters].

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(2) The Collector may, on such terms and conditions and in
such manner as may be prescribed, appoint not more than two Panel
Lawyers (Revenue) for every tahsil.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 62, the
legal practitioners appointed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
may place or act, without any written authority, on behalf of any
[Gram Sabha], Gram Panchayat or Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti in any
court or authority for which he is so appointed.
(4) No [Gram Sabha], Gram Panchayat or Bhumi Prabandhak
Samiti] shall engage any legal practitioner other than one appointed
under this section without prior permission of the Collector.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Court Fees Act,
1870, (Act no. 7 of 1870) no court fee shall be payable on any
Vakalatnama or memo of appearance filed by any legal practitioner
appointed under this section.
(6) The legal practitioners appointed under this section shall
not be competent to plead or act against any [Gram Sabha], Gram
Panchayat or Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti before any court for which he
is so appointed.
[ (7) The State Government may, by notification in the Gazette,
issue any direction, for monitoring of cases filed by or against Gram
Panchayat, [Gram Sabha] or Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti and for
performance based annual appraisal of Panel Advocates appointed
under this Code or the enactments repealed by it, and also for
appointing any law officer for the aforesaid purpose. ]
Representation
of [Gram
Panchayat] 73. (1) In any suit or other proceedings under this Code, the
[Gram Panchayat] shall be represented —
(a) in proceeding before the Collector or in a civil court, by the
District Government Counsel (Revenue) ;
(b) in proceeding before the commissioner, by the Divisional
Government Counsel (Revenue) ; and
(c) in proceeding before the Board of the High Court, by the
separate Standing Counsels (Revenue) of Lucknow or Allahabad, as the
case may be.
(2) Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the State
Government or the collector from appointing special counsel for the
conduct of any suit or proceeding to which any [Gram Panchayat] is
part on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
CHAPTER—IX
Tenures
Classes of
tenures 74. There shall be following classes of tenure holders, namely—
(a) Bhumidhar with transferable rights ;
(b) Bhumidhar with non-transferable rights ;
(c) Asami , and
(d) Government lessee.
Bhumidhar
with
transferable
rights 75. Every person belonging to any of the following classes, shall
be called bhumidhar with transferable rights and shall have all the
rights and shall have all the rights and be subject to all the liabilities
conferred or imposed upon such bhumidhar by or under this Code,
namely.
(a) every person who was a bhumidhar with transferable rights
immediately before the date of commencement of this Code,
(b) every person who in any other manner acquires, on or after
the said date, the rights of such a bhumidhar under or in accordance
with the provisions of this Code or under any other law for the time
being in force.
Bhumidhar
with nontransferable
rights 76. (1) Every person belonging to any of the following classes
shall be called a bhumidhar with non-transferable rights and shall
have all the rights and be subject to all the liabilities conferred or
imposed upon such bhumidhar by or under this Code, namely :—
(a) every person who was a bhumidhar with non-transferable
rights immediately before the date of commencement of this Code ;
(b) every person who is admitted as a bhumidhar with nontransferable rights on or after the said date by the Bhumi Prabandhan
Samiti to any land under or in accordance with the provisions of this
Code ;
[ (c) every person who is allotted any land on or after the said
date under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Bhoodan Yojna
Act, 1952 ; ]
[(d) every person who is allotted any land on or after the said
date under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on
Land Holding Act, 1960 ; ]
[ (dd) every person who was an asami in possession of land not
covered by section 77 of this Code, immediately before the date of the
commencement of this Code and had been recorded as such in class-3
of the annual register (Khatauni) of 1407 Fasli :

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Provided that where the land in possession of a person,
together with any other land, held by him in Uttar Pradesh exceeds the
ceiling area determined under the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling
on Land Holdings Act, 1960, the rights of a Bhumidhar with nontransferable rights shall accrue in favour of such person in respect of
so much area of the first mentioned land, as together with such other
land held by him, does not exceed the ceiling area applicable to him,
and the said area shall be demarcated in the prescribed manner in
accordance with the principles laid down in the aforesaid Act ; ]
(e) every person who in any other manner acquires on or after
the said date, the rights of such a bhumidhar under or in accordance
with the provisions of this Code, or any other law for the time being in
force.
(2) Every person who was a Bhumidhar with non-transferable
rights immediately before the commencement of this Code and had
been such Bhumidhar for a period of [five years] or more shall become
Bhumidhar with transferable rights on such commencement.
(3) Every person who was a Bhumidhar with non-transferable
rights on the commencement referred to sections (1) and (2) or
becomes Bhumidhar with non-transferable rights after such
commencement shall become Bhumidhar with transferable rights after
expiry of five years from his becoming Bhumidhar with nontransferable rights.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions
of this Code, if any person transfers land by sale after becoming
Bhumidhar with transferable rights [under sub-section (2) or subsection (3) ], he shall not be eligible for lease of any land vested in the
[Gram Panchayat] or the State Government or the surplus land
defined in the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings
Act, 1960.
Bhumidhar
rights not to
accrue in
certain lands 77. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or any
other law for the time being in force; no person shall acquire the rights
of a Bhumidhar in the following land :—
(a) Khaliyan, manure pits, pasture land or land normally used
as burial or cremation ground ;
(b) land covered by water and used for the purpose of growing
singhara or other produce ;
(c) land situate in the bed of a river and used for casual or
occasional cultivation ;

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(d) such tracts of shifting or unstable cultivation which the
State Government may by notification specify ;
(e) land declared by the State Government to be intended or set
apart for taungya plantation and notified as such ;
(f) grove land entrusted or deemed to be entrusted to a [Gram
Panchayat] or any other local authority under section 59 ;
(g) land included in sullage farm or trenching ground entrusted
or deemed to be entrusted to a [Gram Panchayat] or any other local
authority under section 59 ;
(h) land acquired or held for a public purpose or a work of
public utility ;
(i) land covered by a pond, tank or lake, or forming part of an
embankment, bandh or bhita ; and
(j) any other land which the State Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf ;
Explanation— The expression ‘public purpose’, in clause (h)
shall include ;
(i) land set apart for military incamping ground ;
(ii) land included within railway or canal boundaries ;
(iii) land acquired and held by a local authority for its own
purposes ;
(iv) land referred to in section 29-C of the Uttar Pradesh
Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 ; or
(v) land reserved by a [Gram Panchayat] for the purposes of
public utility ;
[ * * * * ]
[ (2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
other provisions of this Code, where, any land or part thereof specified
in sub-section (1) of this section is, surrounded by or, in between, or
on the edges and necessary for public purpose, the plot or plots of land
purchased, acquired or resumed for public purpose, the State
Government may change the class of such public utility land, and if
class of such public utility land is changed, any other land equivalent
to or more than that of the aforesaid public utility land, shall be
reserved for the same purpose in the same or any nearby Gram
Panchayat or local authority, as the case may be or the State
Government may permit the exchange thereof under section 101 of
this Code in the manner prescribed :
Provided that the class of any public utility land may be
changed only in the exceptional cases on such terms and conditions,
as may be prescribed. The reason for changing the class of public
utility land shall be recorded in writing.]
——————————————————————————————————————————
2. Omit. by sec. 60(c) by U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(3) The State Government, while changing the class of the land
or permitting the exchange of the same under section 101 of the Code,
shall consider the location, public utility and suitability of the land
proposed to be reserved or exchanged.
(4) If class of land is changed under sub-section (2) of this
section, the Collector shall order the record of rights (Khatauni) and
the map to be corrected accordingly.
Explanation:— The expression ‘public purpose’, in sub-section
(2) of this section means, mutatis mutandis, ‘the public purpose’ as
defined in clause (za) of section 3 of Right of Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Act, 2013 (Act no. 30 of 2013). ]
Asami 78. Every person belonging to any of the following classes, shall
be called an asami, and shall have all the rights and be subject to all
the liabilities conferred or imposed upon such asami by or under this
Code, namely :—
[ (a) subject to the provisions of clause (dd) of sub-section (1) of
before the date of commencement of this Code ; ]
(b) every person who is admitted as an asami on or after the
said date by the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti to any land under or in
accordance with the provisions of this Code ;
(c) every person who is admitted as lessee on or after the said
date, by a bhumidhar of any land under or in accordance with the
provisions of this Code ;
(d) every person who in any other manner acquires the rights of
an asami under or in accordance with the provisions of this Code or
any other law for the time being in force.
Right of
bhumidhars
to exclusive
possession 79. (1) A bhumidhar with transferable rights shall, subject to
the provisions of this Code, have the right to exclusive possession of all
land of which he is such a bhumidhar and to use it for any purpose
whatsoever.
(2) A bhumidhar with non-transferable rights shall, subject to
the provisions of this Code, have the rights to exclusive possession of
all land of which he is such a bhumidhar, and to use such land for any
purpose connected with agriculture.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Use of
holding for
industrial,
commercial
or residential
purposes. [ 80. (1) Where a bhumidhar with transferable rights uses his
holding or part thereof, for industrial, commercial or residential
purposes, the Sub Divisional Officer may, suo motu or on an
application moved by such bhumidhar, after making such enquiry as
may be prescribed, either make a declaration that the land is being
used for the purposes not connected with agriculture or reject the
application. The Sub-Divisional Officer shall state take a decision on
the application within forty five working days from the date of receipt
of the application. In case the application is rejected, the SubDivisional officer shall state the reasons in writing for such rejection
and inform the applicant of his decision.
[Provided that if the application for declaration is accompanied
with the prescribed fee and in case of joint holding, no objection of cotenure holders is attached in case of co-tenure holder and if the
declaration is not made by the Sub-Divisional Officer with forty-five
days as aforesaid, then the declaration shall be deemed to have been
made. Tehsildar will make a record of it in the revenue records, with
the comment ‘‘subject to the order of the Sub-Divisional Officer.’’
If any aforesaid party wants to file an objection in relation to
the said declaration, it may file an objection in the competent court.]
(2) Where a bhumidhar with transferable rights proposes to use
in future his holding or part thereof, for industrial, commercial or
residential purposes, the Sub-Divisional Officer may on an application
moved by such bhumidhar, after making such enquiry as may be
prescribed, either make a declaration that the land may be used for
the purpose not connected with agriculture or reject the application,
within forty five working days from the date of receipt of the
application, within forty five working days from the date of receipt of
the application. In case the application is rejected, the Sub-Divisional
officer shall state the reasons in writing of such rejection and inform
the applicant of his decision ;
[x x x x]
Provided further that if the bhumidhar fails to start the
proposed non-agricultural activity within a period of five years from the
date of declaration under this sub-section, then the declaration under
sub-section (2) for the holding or part thereof shall lapse ;
Provided also that a declaration under this sub-section (2) shall
not amount to change of land use and the land shall continue to be
treated as agricultural land only. However, the bhumidhar shall be
entitled to obtain loan and other necessary permissions, clearances
etc. for the activity or project, proposed on the holding or part thereof,
for which declaration under this sub-section has been obtained.
(3) A bhumidhar possessing declaration under sub-section (2)
for his holding or part thereof, may apply to Sub-Divisional officer for
converting declaration under sub-section (2) to a declaration under
sub-section (1), after completion of construction activity or start of the
proposed non-agricultural activity, within a period of five years from
declaration under sub-section (2). On receipt of such an application,
the Sub-Divisional officer, after making such enquiry as necessary,
shall approve or reject the application within a period of 15 days from
——————————————————————————————————————————
3. Omitted by sec. 33 of U.P. Act no. 4 of 2021.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
the receipt of the application. In case of rejection, he shall record in
writing the reasons for such rejection ;
Provided that for conversion of declaration under sub-section
(2) to a declaration under sub-section (1), the bhumidhar shall be
liable to pay only the balance amount of fee payable, calculated at
prevailing circle rate, after adjusting the amount already paid by him
for declaration under sub-section (2) earlier.
(4) No application for a declaration under sub-section (1) or (2),
moved by any co-bhumidhar having undivided interest in bhumidhari
land shall be maintainable, unless application is moved by all the cobhumidhars of such bhumidhari land. In case only one of the cobhumidhar wants to get a declaration for his share in the land with
joint interest, then such an application shall be entertained only after
the respective shares of the co-bhumidhars in the land have been
divided in accordance with the provisions of law.
(5) The application for declaration [under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2)] shall contain such particulars and shall be made in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) Where the application under sub-section (1) or sub-section
(2) is made in respect of a part of the holding, the sub-divisional officer
may, in the manner prescribed, demarcate such part for purposes of
such declaration.
(7) No declaration under this section shall be made by the subdivisional officer, if he is satisfied that the land or part thereof is being
used or is proposed to be used for a purpose which is likely to cause a
public nuisance or to affect adversely public order, public health,
safety or convenience or which is against the uses proposed in the
master plan.
(8) In case the land or part thereof for which a declaration
under this section is being sought falls within the area notified under
any Urban or Industrial Development Authority, then prior permission
of the concerned Development Authority shall be mandatory.
(9) The State Government may fix the scale of fees for
declaration under this section and different fees may be fixed for
different purposes :
Provided that if the applicant uses the holding or part thereof,
for his own residential purpose, no fee shall be charged for the
declaration under this section. ]
Consequen ces
of declaration 81. Where a declaration has been made under [sub-section (1)
of section 80] the following consequences shall, in respect of such
holding or part to which it relates ensue ;

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(a) all restrictions imposed by or under this Chapter in respect
of transfer of land shall cease to apply to the bhumidhar with
transferable rights;
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter XI, the land
shall, with effect from the commencement of the agricultural year
following the date of declaration, be exempted from payment of land
revenue ;
(c) the bhumidhar shall, in the matter of devolution be governed
by the personal law to which he is subject.
Cancellation
of
declaration 82. (1) Whenever any holding or part thereof in respect of
which a declaration has been made under section 80 is used for [any
purpose connected with agriculture], the Sub-Divisional Officer may, of
his own motion or on an application made in that behalf and after
making such inquiry as may be prescribed, cancel such declaration.
(2) Where a declaration is cancelled under sub-section (1) the
following consequences shall in respect of the holding or part to which
it relates ensue namely :—
(a) the holding or part shall become subject to all restrictions
imposed by or under this Chapter in matters of transfer and
devolution;
(b) the holding or part shall become liable to payment of land
revenue with effect from the commencement of the agricultural year in
which the order for cancellation of the declaration is made ;
Provided that until any land revenue is reassessed on such
holding or part in accordance with the provisions of this Code, the land
revenue payable or deemed to be payable in respect or such holding or
part before the grant of declaration under section 80 shall be deemed
to be the land revenue payable in respect of such holding or part,
(c) where the land is in possession of any person other than the
bhumidhar thereof on the basis of a contract or lease, and the terms of
such contract or lease are inconsistent with the provisions of this
Code, such contract or lease shall to the extent of the inconsistency,
become void and the person in possession shall be liable to ejectment
on the suit of the bhumidhar ;
Provided that a mortgage with possession existing on the date
of the cancellation of the declaration shall, to the extent of the amount
due and secured on such land, be deemed to be substituted by a
simple mortgage carrying such rates of interest as may be prescribed ;
Recording of
declaration
or
cancellation [83. Every declaration under section 80 or cancellation under
be prescribed and, even after declaration under section 80, the

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
mutation order on the basis of transfer or succession shall be passed
in the manner prescribed. ]
Right of an
asami for
exclusive
possession of
his holding 84. An asami shall, subject to the provision of this Code, have
the right to exclusive possession of all land comprised in his holding
and to use such land for any purpose connected with agriculture ;
Provided that no asami shall be entitled to sue any land
declared by the State Government by notification to be intended or set
apart for taungya plantation, for any purpose other than cultivation
and raising of crops.
Consequences
of using the
land in
contravenetion
of the
provisions of
this Code 85. (1) Where a bhumidhar with non-transferable rights uses
his holding or part thereof, in contravention of the provisions of section
79, he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other
provision of this Code, be liable to ejectment from such holding or part
on the suit of the [Gram Panchayat].
(2) Where an asami uses his holding or part thereof for any
purpose not permitted by section 84, he shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in any other provision of this Code, be liable to
ejectment from such holding or part, on the suit of the land holder.
(3) A decree for ejectment under this section may direct
payment of damages equivalent to the cost of works which may be
required to restore the land to its original condition.
Extinction of
interest of
bhumidhar
with nontransferable
rights or asami 86. Where a bhumidhar with non-transferable rights or an
asami has been ejected from any holding or part thereof in accordance
with section 85, all rights and interest of such bhumidhar or asami in
such holding or part together with any improvements made therein
shall stand extinguished.
Improvement
not to be
removed 87. (1) It shall be lawful for a bhumidhar to make any
improvement in the land of which he is bhumidhar, for cultivation of
such land or for more convenient use thereof.
(2) Where the right, title or interest of any tenure holder in any
holding or part is extinguished under or in accordance with the
provisions of this Code, he shall not be entitled to remove or
appropriate any improvement made by him under sub-section (1).

Transferability
of a
bhumidhars
interest Transfers
88. (1) The interest of a bhumidhar with transferable rights
shall, subject to the provision of this Code, be transferable.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Code or any
other law for the time being in force, the interest of a bhumidhar with
non-transferable rights or an asami in any holding shall not be
transferable.
Restriction
on transfer
by
bhumidhar 89. (1) No bhumidhar shall have the right to transfer any
holding or part thereof where such transfer contravenes or is likely to
contravene the provisions of sub-section (2) or sub-section (3).
[(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), no person
shall have the right to acquire by purchase or gift any holding or part
thereof from a bhumidhar with transferable rights where the transferee
shall as a result of such acquisition become entitled to land which
together with land, if any, held by such transferee and where such
transferee is natural person, also together with land is any held by his
family shall exceed 5.0586 hectares in Uttar Pradesh.]
[x x x x]
[ (3) The State Government or an officer authorized for this
purpose under this Act may approve an acquisition or purchase done
or proposed to be done, in excess of the limits specified in sub-section
(2), if such acquisition or purchase is in favour of a registered firm,
company, partnership firm, limited liability partnership firm, trust,
society or any educational or a charitable institution ; and if it is of
opinion that the acquisition or purchase would be in public interest
and likely to generate economic activities (other than agricultural) and
provide employment. In such case, the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh
Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holding Act, 1960 shall not apply to
such acquisition ;
[Provided that where the land has been acquired or purchased
by registered firm, company partnership firm, limited liability
partnership firm, trust, society or any other educational or a charitable
institution, without obtaining prior approval under this sub-section or
sub-section (3) of section 154 of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition
and Land Reform Act, 1950 as enacted before the repeal, the State
Government or an officer authorized for this purpose under this Act,
may give its approval for regularizing such acquisition or purchase,
after payment of an amount as fine, which shall be ten percent of the
cost of the land in excess of the limit prescribed under sub-section (2)
calculated as per the circle rate prevailing at the time of making the
application :
Provided further that where the State Government is satisfied
that any transfer has been made in the public interest under various
promotion investment policies or for the projects being encouraged by
the State Government, for the establishment or private Universities
and medical colleges, it may exempt any such transferee from the
payment of fine under this sub-section.]
——————————————————————————————————————————
2. Omitted by sec. 4 of U.P. Act no. 4 of 2021.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(4) Permission under sub-section (3) for acquisition or purchase
of land by a registered firm, company, partnership firm, limited liability
partnership firm, trust, society or any educational or a charitable
institution in excess of limits prescribed under sub-section (2) shall be
granted, on the conditions and in the manner prescribed, by :–
(i) the Collector concerned for acquisition or purchase of land
upto 20.2344 hectares ;
(ii) the Commissioner concerned for acquisition or purchase of
land more than 20.2344 hectares and upto 40.4688 hectares ;
(iii) the State Government for acquisition or purchase of land
more than 40.4688 hectares :
Provided that if the applicant fails to set up the project within a
period of five years from the date of grant of permission under subsection (3), the same shall lapse and the land acquired or purchased in
excess of the limit prescribed under sub-section (2) shall vest in the
State and the consequences of section 105 shall become applicable :
Provided further that the State Government may extend the
period of permission granted under sub-section (3) for a further period
of maximum three years, after recording reasons for the same. ]
Persons
other than
Indian
nationals not
to acquire
land 90. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or in any
other law for the time being in force, no person, other than an Indian
citizen, shall have the right to acquire any land, by sale or gift, or in
any other manner involving transfer of possession in his favour,
without prior permission in writing from the State Government.
Explanation: —For the purposes of this section, the expression
“an Indian citizen” includes any company or association or body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or
substantially owned or controlled by Indian citizens.
Restrictions
on transfer
by mortgage 91. No bhumidhar shall have the right to mortgage any holding
or its part where possession of the mortgaged property is transferred or
agreed to be transferred to the mortgagee as security for the amount of
mortgage advanced or to be advanced or for interest thereon.
[ Mortgage
and land by
bhumidhar
with nontransferable
rights] 92. Subject to the provisions of this Code, the interest of a
bhumidhar with non-transferable rights in any holding or its part may
be—
(a) transferred by mortgage without possession as security for a
loan taken or to be taken from the State Government or a bank or a
co-operative society or the U. P. State Agro Industrial Corporation Ltd.
or any other financial institution owned and controlled by such
Government ;
(b) sold in execution of a decree of any court regarding the
matter referred to in clause (a) or in proceedings for collection of land
revenue under Chapter XII.
Transfer of
possession
for securing
money shall
be deemed to
be a sale 93. If any bhumidhar transfers possession of any holding or
part thereof for the purpose of securing any money advanced by way of
loan or in lieu of interest on such loan, then, notwithstanding anything
contained in any law or contract or document of transfer, the
transaction shall be deemed at all times and for the purposes of this
Code, to be a sale to the transferee, and to every such sale, the
provisions of section 89 shall apply.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Lease by a
Bhumidhar [94. (1) A Bhumidhar may lease out his holding or any part
thereof to any person, firm, company, partnership firm, limited liability
partnership firm, trust, society or any other legal entity for agriculture
or for setting up a solar energy plant. Such lease shall be known as the
private lease by a bhumidhar.
(2) Private lease by a Bhumidhar means a contract based on an
agreement, with mutually agreed terms and conditions, between
Lessor, who may be a Bhumidhar and the Lessee who wishes to
undertake agricultural activities or set up a solar energy plant, by
which the Lessor grants permission to the Lessee to use the land or
holding or any part thereof for agricultural purposes or for
establishment of solar energy plant, against a consideration in cash or
kind or a share of produce, payable to the Lessor as per the lease
agreement.
(3) Period of private lease by a bhumidhar — maximum period
of the private lease by a Bhumidhar shall not exceed fifteen years at a
time :
Provided that, after the expiration of the first lease period, the
duration of lease period may be further extended by mutual consent of
the Lessor and the Lessee :
Provided further that for purpose of establishing a solar energy
plant, the maximum period may be upto thirty years.
(4) Conditions of the private Lease by a bhumidhar — The
terms and conditions of the private lease by a bhumidhar shall be as
mutually agreed between the Lessor and Lessee. The general
conditions of the lease shall be in the manner as may be prescribed. ]
Lease-how
made, its
termination
and any
dispute
arising
thereto [ 95. Private lease by a bhumidhar may be oral or in writing or
Registered –
(1) Private Lease by a bhumidhar for a single crop or fro period
upto one year may be either oral or in writing. Lease agreement for
period exceeding one year shall be made by a registered instrument
only.
(2) Private Lease by a bhumidhar to be recorded in remarks
column of Record of Rights – In case of written or registered lease
agreement, a copy of the agreement or deed shall be made available to
Revenue Inspector concerned, who shall pass order for recording the
details of the private lease by a bhumidhar lease agreement (names
and other details of Lessor and Lessee, date of agreement, period of
lease, proposed use of land; and annual lease rent) in the Remarks
column of Record of Rights (Khatauni).

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(3) Private Lease by a bhumidhar shall not create any type of
Tenancy Right An agreement of private lease by a Bhumidhar either
registered under the Registration Act, 1908 or countersigned by a
Revenue Officer or Gram Pradhan or notarized by a Notary or oral,
shall not create or confer any rights or interest in favour of the Lessee
over the leased land, including protected tenancy or occupancy right or
any other right against eviction or lease termination, other than those
contained in this Act or Rules, the lease agreement shall not be used
by the Lessee to establish and permanent right over the leased land in
any Court of Law.
(4) Resumption of Land – After expiration of the private lease by
a bhumidhar period of or termination of such private lease, the
instrument of private lease by a bhumidhar shall be a nullify and if the
period of such private lease is not extended, the leased land shall
automatically revert to the Lessor and the Lessee shall hand over
peaceful possession of the land, free from all encumbrances, to the
Lessor and shall cease to have any right, title or interest in the land so
leased out.
Explanation —Regardless of any dispute, arising out of private
lease made under Seciton-94, pending before any Court of Law, the
Lessor shall be entitled to get peaceful possession of the leased land
after the expiration of the private lease period and the Lessee shall
have no right to retain possession over the leased land.
(5) Effect of Private Lease by a bhumidhar – The provisions
contained in the Code regarding private lease by a bhumidhar shall not
have retrospective effect.
(6) Termination of the private lease by a bhumidhar –
(a) Unless extended by mutual consent between the Lessor and
Lessee, the private lease agreement would terminate on expiry of the
private lease period mentioned in the agreement;
(b) In case of non-payment of consideration amount or annual
lease rent by the Lessee by the due date, or if any of the terms and
conditions of the private lease are violated by him, the private lease by
a bhumidhar agreement may be terminated by the Lessor, prior to
expiry of the lease period, after giving due notice to the Lessee in
writing;
(c) In case the private lease agreement is proposed to be
terminated prematurely by the Lessor, then the Lessee shall be entitled
to remove such structures, machinery etc. that were created or
installed by the Lessee on the leased land. The Lessee would also be
entitled to recover such damages and compensation form the Lessor,
as agreed upon and laid down in the private lease agreement;
(d) In case the Lessee wishes to terminate the lease agreement
prematurely or surrenders the land during the private lease by a

[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
bhumidhar period, then he shall have to give at least six months’
notice to the Lessor and shall also be liable to pay the annual rent for
the remaining part of the year to the Lessor, in addition to such other
compensation, as agreed upon and laid down in the private lease by a
bhumidhar agreement or as prescribed;
(e) In case after expiration of the private lease by a bhumidhar
period or termination of the lease agreement, the Lessee fails to
handover peaceful possession of the leased land to the Lessor, the
Lessee shall be treated as unauthorized occupant and shall be liable to
be ejected from the leased land. The Lessee shall also be liable to pay
such penal rent or damages to the Lessor for the period of
unauthorized occupation, as provided in the private lease by a
bhumidhar agreement, in addition to the cost of such ejection;
(f) The Lessor and Lessee may terminate the private lease by a
bhumidhar on mutually agreed terms at any time.
(7) Disputes arising out of the private lease by a bhumidhar—
(a) In an event of a dispute arising out of the private lease
agreement by a bhumidhar, or any terms and conditions thereof, the
Lessee and the Lessor shall make all efforts to amicably resolve and
settle the dispute amongst themselves or if mutually agreed, by using
mediation by a third party arbitrator or Gram Panchayat or Village
Revenue Committee;
(b) If the dispute is not settled through the mechanism
mentioned in clause (a) either party may file a petition before the SubDivisional Officer;
(c) The Sub-Divisional Officer shall adjudicate the dispute using
the summary procedure within a period of thirty days of its institution;
(d) An appeal against the order, other than an interim order,
passed by a Sub-Divisional Officer, shall lie before the Commissioner.
The decision of Commissioner shall subject to the provision of section
210, be final. ]
96. [ X X X X X ]
97. [ X X X X X ]
Restrictions
on transfer
by
Bhumidhars
belonging to
a scheduled
caste [98. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Chapter, no
bhumidhar belonging to a scheduled caste shall have the right to
transfer, by way of sale, gift, mortgage or lease any land to a person
not belonging to a scheduled caste, except with the previous
permission of the Collector in writing :

——————————————————————————————————————————
1. Omit. by sec. 13 of U. P. Act no. 07 of 2019.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Provided that the permission by the Collector may be granted
only when—
(a) the bhumidhar belonging to a scheduled caste has no
surviving heir specified in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 108 or
clause (a) of section 110, as the case may be ; or
(b) the bhumidhar belonging to a scheduled caste has settled or
is ordinarily residing in the district other than that in which the land
proposed to be transferred is situate or in any other State for the
purpose of any service or any trade, occupation, profession or
business; or
(c) the Collector is, for the reasons prescribed, satisfied that it
is necessary to grant the permission for transfer of land.
(2) For the purposes of granting permission under this section
the Collector may make such inquiry as may be prescribed. ]
Restrictions
on transfer
by
bhumidhars
of scheduled
tribes 99. Without prejudice to the provisions of this Chapter, no
bhumidhar belonging to a scheduled tribe shall have the right to
transfer, by way of sale, gift, mortgage or lease any land to a person
not belonging to a scheduled tribe.
Mortgage by
members of
scheduled
caste and
scheduled
tribes 100. A bhumidhar or an asami belonging to a scheduled caste
or a scheduled tribe may, notwithstanding anything contained in any
other provision of this Code, transfer his interest in any holding or
part, by mortgage without possession as security for a loan taken or to
be taken from the State Government or any institution referred to in
clause (a) of section 92.
Exchange [ 101. (1) Notwithstanding anything in section 77 of this Code,
any bhumidhar may with prior permission in writing of the SubDivisional Officer exchange his land with the land —
(a) held by another bhumidhar ; or
(b) entrusted or deemed to be entrusted to any Gram Panchayat
or a local authority under section 59.
(2) The Sub-Divisional Officer shall refuse permission under
sub-section (1) in the following cases, namely :—
(a) if the exchange is not necessary for the consolidation of
holdings or securing convenience in cultivation ; or
(b) if the difference between the valuation determined in the
manner prescribed, of the lands given and received in exchange
exceeds ten percent of the lower valuation ; or
[Provided that permission for exchange may be granted even if
the valuation of private land offered for exchange is more than ten
percent of the value of the public land.]
(c) if the difference between the areas of the land given and
received in exchange exceeds twenty five percent of the lesser area ; or
[Provided that permission for exchange may be granted even if
the area of private land offered for exchange is more than twenty five
percent of the area of the public land.]
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(d) in the case of land referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1),
if it is reserved for planned use, or is land in which bhumidhari rights
do not accrue ; or
(e) if the land is not located in same or adjacent village of the
same tehsil :
Provided that the State Government may permit the exchange
with land mentioned in clause (d) aforesaid, on the conditions and in
the manner, prescribed.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to empower any
person to exchange his undivided interest in any holding, except where
such exchange is in between two or more same co-sharers.
(4) Nothing in the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (Act no. 16 of
1908) shall apply to an exchange in accordance with this section. ]
Consequen ces
of exchange 102. Where an exchange is made in accordance with section
—
(a) the parties to the exchange shall have the same rights in the
land received in exchange as they had in the land given ;
(b) the Sub-Divisional Officer shall order the record of rights
(Khatauni) to be corrected accordingly ; and
(c) the amount of land revenue assessed, payable or deemed to
be payable for the land so exchanged shall not be affected thereby.

Transfer in
contravention
of this code to
be void 103. [ X X X X X ]
[104. Every Lease or transfer of interest in any holding or part
thereof made by a bhumidhar or any asami in contravention of the
provisions of this Code shall be void. ]
Consequen ces
of transfer by
Bhumidhar in
contravenetion
of the Code 105. (1) Where transfer of interest in any holding or part made
by a bhumidhar is void under section 104, the following consequences
shall, with effect from the date of such transfer, ensue, namely :—
(a) the subject matter of such transfer shall vest in the State
Government free from all encumbrances ;
(b) the trees; crops, wells and other improvements; existing on
such holding or part shall vest in the State Government free from all
encumbrances ;

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(c) the interests of the transferor and the transferee in the
properties specified in clauses (a) and (b) shall stand extinguished ;
(d) the extinction of interest of the transferor under clause (c)
shall operate to extinguish the interest of any asami holding under
him;
[ (e) the provisions of this section shall not apply to any lease
made under section 94. ]
(2) Where any land or other property has vested in the State
Government under sub-section (1) it shall be lawful for the Collector to
take over possession of such land and other property, and to direct
that any person occupying such land or property be evicted there from,
and for that purpose, the Collector may use or cause to be used such
force as may be necessary and the provisions of section 59 mutatis
mutandis shall apply to such property.
Consequences
of transfer
made by asami
in
contravenetion
of this Code 106. Where transfer of interest in any holding or part made by
an asami is void under section 104, such asami shall be liable to
ejectment on the suit of the [Gram Panchayat] or other land holder, as
the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

Bequest by
Bhumidhar or
Asami Devolution
107. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a
bhumidhar with transferable rights may bequeath is interest in any
holding by will.
(2) In relation to a bhumidhar with transferable rights
belonging to a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe, the provisions of
to transfer during life time.
(3) Every will made under this section shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in any law, custom or usage, be in writing attested
by two witnesses and registered.
(4) No bhumidhar with non-transferable rights or asami shall
have the right to bequeath his interest in any holding by will.
(5) A bequest made in contravention of the provisions of this
section shall be void.
General order
of succession
to male
bhumidhar,
asami or
government
lessee [108. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 107, where a
bhumidhar, asami or government lessee, being a male 4(third gender)
dies, his interest in his holding shall devolve upon his heirs being the
relatives specified in sub-section (2) in accordance with the following
principles, namely :—
(i) the heirs specified in any one clause of sub-section (2) shall
take simultaneously in equal shares ;
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(ii) the heirs specified in any preceding clause of sub-section (2)
shall take to the exclusion of all heirs specified in succeeding clauses,
that is to say, those in clause (a) shall be preferred to those in clause
(b), those in clause (b) shall be preferred to those in clause (c) and so
on, in succession ;
(iii) if there are more widows than one, of the bhumidhar, asami
or government lessee, or of any predeceased male lineal descendant,
who would have been an heir, if alive, all such widows together shall
take one share ;
(iv) the widow or widowed mother or the father’s widowed
mother or the widow of any predeceased male lineal descendant who
would have been an heir, if alive, shall inherit only if she has not
remarried.
[(2) The following relatives of the male third gender Bhumidhar, asami or government lessee are heirs subject to the provisions of
sub section (1), namely–
(a) Widow, or third gender spouse, unmarried daughters, third
gender issue and the male lineal descendants in the male line of
descent per stripes :
Provided that widow, unmarried daughters, third gender issue
and sons howsoever low shall inherit per stripes the share which
would have devalved upon the predeceased son had he been alive.
(b) Mother and father;
(c) Married daughter;
(d) Brother, unmarried sister, third gender sibling being
respectively the son and daughter, third gender issue of the same
father as the deceased, and son unmarried daughter, third gender
issue of prececeased brother, the predeceased brother, having been the
son of the same father as the deceased;
(e) Son’s daughter and third gender issue;
(f) Father’s mother and father’s father;
(g) Daughter’s son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter;
(h) Married sister;
(i) Half sister, being the daughter of the same father as the
deceased;
(j) Sister’s son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter;
(k) Half sister, being the daughter of the same father as the
deceased;
(l) Brother ’s son’s son, third gender issue and unmarried
daughter;
(m) Father’s father’s son, third gender issue and unmarried
daughger;
(n) Father’s father’s son’s son, third gender issue and
unmarried daughter;
(o) Mother’s mother’s son, third gender issue and unmarried
daughter.]
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Succession
to woman
inheriting
interest as a
female heir 109. Where before or after the commencement of this Code,
any woman inherits the interest of a male 1(third gender) bhumidhar,
asami or Government lessee in any holding, and such woman dies,
marries or remarries after such commencement, then, her interest and
the holding shall, subject to the provisions of section 107 and 112
devolve upon the nearest surviving heir of the last male 1(third gender)
bhumidhar, asami or Government lessee, as the case may be.
Explanation: —The expression ‘nearest surviving heir’ in this
section means the heir ascertained in accordance with section 108.
[ Provided that if any woman inheriting as a daughter, who has
surviving heirs specified in clause (a) of section 110 of this Code, dies,
her interest in the holding shall devolve upon heirs specified in clause
(a) of section 110. ]
Succession
to women
holding
otherwise
than as the
female heir [110. Where any female bhumidhar, asami or a government
lessee dies, after the commencement of this code, then her interest in
any holding or its part shall subject to the provisions of Sections 107
to 109, devolve, in accordance with the order of succession given
below:–
(a) Son, third gender issue, unmarried daughter, son’s son,
third gender issue, and unmarried daughter, son’s son’s son, third
gender issue and unmarried daughter, predeceased son’s widow, and
predeceased son’s predeceased son’s widow, in equal shares as per
stripes :
Provided firstly that the nearer shall exclude the remoter in the
same branch :
Provided secondly that a widow who has remarried, shall be
excluded :
(b) Husband or married third gender spouse;
(c) Married daughgers;
(d) Daughter’s son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter;
(e) Father;
(f) Widow mother;
(g) Brother being the son of the same father as the deceased,
third gender sibling being the issue of the same father as the deceased
and brother’s son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter as per
stripes;
(h) Unmarried sister;
(i) Married sister;
(j) Sister’s son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter.
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Savings as to
religious
endowments,
etc. 111. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to apply to the
devolution of management of a Hindu devasthan, math or debutter
property or of a Muslim wakf composing any holding, which shall
continue to be governed by such personal or other law as may be
applicable to it.
Interest of
co-tenure
holders to
pass by
survivorship 112. (1) Where before or after the commencement of this Code,
two or more co—widows inherit the interest of a male tenure-holder,
and any one of them dies or remarries after such commencement
without leaving any heir entitled to succeed in accordance with section
108, the interest of such co-widow shall pass by survivorship to the
surviving widow, and where there are two or more surviving co-widows,
then to the surviving co-widows in equal shares;
Devolution of
interest
among
surviving
co—tenure
holders (2) Where any land is held by two or more co-tenure holders
and any one of them dies after the commencement of this Code
without leaving any heir entitled to succeed under sections 108 to
110, to the interests of such co-tenure holders shall pass to the
surviving co-tenure holders in equal shares.
Persons
other than
Indian
citizens and
persons of
Indian origin
not to inherit 113. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or any
other law for the time being in force, no person other than an Indian
citizen and person of Indian origin who has acquired citizenship of any
other country shall be entitled to acquire any land or any interest
therein either by bequest or by inheritance.
Other
conditions
regarding
devolution 114. The devolution of interest in any holding under this
Chapter shall be subject to the following conditions :—
(a) If a bhumidhar or asami dies intestate, and at the time of
his death; a child was in the womb who was subsequently born alive,
then such child shall have the same right to inherit as if he or she had
been born before the death of such [bhumidhar, asami or government
lessee], and the inheritance shall be deemed to vest in such a case
with effect from the date of death of such [bhumidhar, asami or
government lessee] ;
(b) Where two persons have died in circumstances rendering it
uncertain whether either of them and if so which survived the other ,
then for purposes of devolution of interest in any holding, it shall be
presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the younger survived the
elder ;

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(c) A person who commits murder of a [bhumidhar, asami or
government lessee], or abets the commission of such murder, shall be
disqualified from inheriting the interest of the deceased in any holding;
(d) If any person is disqualified from inheriting the interest in
the holding of any [bhumidhar, asami or government lessee] under
clause (c), such interest shall devolve as if the disqualified person had
died before the death of such [bhumidhar, asami or government
lessee].
[ Explanation— In this section, the expression ‘murder’ means
any offence punishable under section 302, section 304, section 304-B,
Escheat 115. (1) Where a bhumidhar or an asami holding land from a
[Gram Panchayat] dies without known heir, the Sub-Divisional Officer
may take possession of the land held by such bhumidhar or asami,
and may lease it for a period of one agricultural year at a time, in the
manner prescribed.
(2) The terms and conditions of every lease under sub-section
(1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) If within three years of the date on which the Sub-Divisional
Officer takes possession of the land any claimant applies for the land
being restored to him, the Sub-Divisional Officer may, after such
inquiry as he thinks fit, allow of reject his claim.
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order rejecting his claim under
sub-section (3) may within one year from the date of communication of
such order to him, file a suit for declaration of his rights under section
114.
(5) The Sub-Divisional Officer shall continue to lease out the
land in accordance with sub-sections (1) and (2) till the suit referred to
in sub-section (4) is finally decided.
(6) If no claimant appears within three years from the date of
taking possession of the land by the Sub-Divisional Officer, or it the
claimant whose claim has been rejected under sub-section (3) does not
file a suit in accordance with sub-section (4) or the suit if filed is finally
dismissed then the land shall be deemed to have vested in the [Gram
Panchayat] or the local authority under section 59 with effect from the
following date, namely :–
(a) where no claimant appears, from the date of expiry of the
three years period referred to in sub-section (3) ; or

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(b) where the claimant does not file a suit for declaration, from
the date of expiry of the one year period referred to ins sub-section (4) ;
or
(c) where the suit filed by the claimant under sub-section (4) is
finally dismissed, from the date of such final dismissal.
(7) Where any claimant succeeds in any claim under subsection (3) or in any, suit filed under sub-section (4), he shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
force, be entitled to possession of the land and to the rent realized from
the lessee after deducting all arrears of land revenue due in respect of
such land and the expenses of its management.

Suit for
division of
holding DIVISION
116. (1) A bhumidhar may sue for the division of the holding of
which he is a co-sharer.
[ (2) In every such suit, the court may also divide the trees,
wells and other improvements existing on such holding but where
such division is not possible, the trees, wells and other improvements
aforesaid and valuation thereof shall be divided and adjusted in the
manner prescribed. ]
(3) One suit may be instituted for the division of more holdings
than one where all the parties to the suit other than the [Gram
Panchayat] are, jointly interested in each of the holdings.
(4) To every suit under this section, the [Gram Panchayat]
concerned shall be made a party.
Duty of Court
in suits for
division of
holding 117. (1) In every suit for division of holding under section 116
the Court of Assistant Collector shall,–
(a) follow such procedure as may be prescribed;
(b) apportion the land revenue payable in respect of each such
division.
(2) A division of holding referred to in section 116 shall not
affect the joint liability of the tenure-holders thereof in respect of the
land revenue payable before the date of the final decree.

Surrender by
bhumidhar SURRENDER AND ABANDONMENT
118. (1) A bhumidhar may surrender his interest in any
holding or any part thereof by giving an application in writing to the
Tahsildar intimating his intention to do so and by giving up possession
thereof to him whether or not such holding is let.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(2) Where only part of a holding has been surrendered, the
Tahsildar shall apportion the land revenue payable by such
bhumidhar.
Surrender by
asami 119. An asami may surrender his interest in any holding (but
not any part thereof) by giving notice in writing to the land holder
intimating his intention to do so, and by giving up possession thereof
to him.
Effect of
surrender 120. (1) A bhumidhar or asami shall be deemed to have
surrendered any land held by him, with effect from the date when
possession over such land is given up in accordance with section 118
or section 119.
(2) Where any land is so surrendered—
(a) by an asami, his right, title or interest in such land shall be
deemed to have been extinguished from the date of such surrender.
(b) by a bhumidhar the right, title and interest of such
bhumidhar and of every other person claiming through him in such
holding or its part shall be deemed to have been extinguished from the
said date.
Liability for
rent-revenue
in case of
surrender 121. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 118 to 120, the
bhumidhar, or asami shall continue to be liable to pay the land
revenue or the rent, as the case may be, for the holding in respect of
the agricultural year next following the date of surrender, unless the
notice of surrender was given before the first day of April.
Abandonment by
bhumidhar 122. (1) if a bhumidhar does not pay the land revenue and
[does not use the land for agriculture] for a continuous period of three
agricultural years and has left the village in which he usually resides
and whose where about are not known, then the Collector may, after
such inquiry, as he may deem necessary, take possession of the land
held by such bhumidhar.
(2) Where the Collector has taken possession of any land under
sub-section (1), he may let it out on behalf of the bhumidhar for a
period of one agricultural year at a time in the manner prescribed.
(3) If the bhumidhar or any other person lawfully entitled to the
land claims it within a period of three years from the commencement
of the agricultural year next following the date on which the Collector
took possession thereof, it shall be restored to him on payment of
dues, if any and on such terms and conditions as the Collector may
think fit.
(4) Where no claim is preferred under sub-section (3) or if any
claim is preferred but is disallowed, the Collector shall make an order
declaring the holding abandoned.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(5) Every order of the Collector under sub-section (4) shall be
published in the manner prescribed, and shall, subject to the result of
any Suit under section 144, be final.
(6) Nothing in this section shall apply to any holding held by a
bhumidhar in whose favour a declaration has been made under
Consequence
of
abandonment 123. Where any holding has been abandoned under section
122, the following consequences shall ensue, namely —
(a) the holding shall vest absolutely in the State Government
free from all encumbrances ;
(b) the bhumidhar concerned shall cease to have any right, title
or interest in such holding ;
(c) the bhumidhar concerned shall continue to be liable for land
revenue due in respect of such holding for the agricultural year during
which the order referred to in sub-section (4) of the said section was
made.
Delivery of
possession to
[Gram
Panchayat] 124. (1) When the interest of a bhumidhar in any land is
extinguished under the provisions of this Code or any other law for the
time being in force, the Sub-Divisional Officer may on the application
of the [Gram Panchayat] concerned evict any person in unauthorized
occupation of such land and deliver possession thereof to the [Gram
Panchayat] in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall mutatis mutandis
apply to the eviction of an asami holding land from a [Gram
Panchayat], or from a bank under sub-section (2) of section 95.

Admission by
Bhumi
Prabandhak
Samiti to
land
entrusted to
[Gram
Panchayat] LEASE OF LAND BY [Gram Panchayat]
125. The Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti may, with the previous
approval of the Sub-Divisional Officer, admit any person as—
(a) bhumidhar with non-transferable rights to any land
entrusted or deemed to be entrusted to the [Gram Panchayat] under
(b) asami to any land specified in section 77 except in clause (a)
or clause (h) or (i) thereof where such land is entrusted or deemed to
be entrusted to the [Gram Panchayat] under section 59 other than a
tank specified in clause (a) of section 61.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Order of
preferences
in admission
to land by
Bhumi
Prabandhak
Samiti 126. (1) In the admission of any person to land as bhumidhar
with non-transferable rights or as asami under section 125, hereinafter
in this Chapter referred to as allotment of land, the Bhumi
Prabandhak Samiti shall observe the following order of preference :—
(a) a landless widow, sons unmarried daughters or parents
residing in the [Gram Sabha] of a person who has lost his life while in
active service in the Armed Forces of the Union ;
(b) a landless person residing in the [Gram Sabha] who has
become wholly disabled while in active service in the Armed Forces of
the Union ;
(c) a landless agricultural labourer residing in the Gram Sabha
and belonging to a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe, other backward
class or a person of general category living below poverty line as
determined by the State Government.
(d) any other landless agricultural labourer residing in the
[Gram Sabha] ;
(e) a landless person residing in the [Gram Sabha] who has
retired or been released or discharged from service in the Armed Forces
of the Union, otherwise than as an officer,
(f) a landless freedom fighter residing in the [Gram Sabha], who
has not been granted political pension ;
(g) any bhumidhar or asami residing in the [Gram Sabha] and
holding land less than 1.26 hectares ;
(h) any other landless agricultural labourer belonging to a
scheduled caste or scheduled tribe, other backward class or a person
of general category living below poverty line as determined by the State
Government not residing in the [Gram Sabha] but residing in the
Nyaya Panchayat circle referred to in section 42 of U. P. Panchayat Raj
Act, 1947.
Explanation— For the purposes of this sub-section—
(i) ‘allotment’ includes any allotment made under the
corresponding provisions of any enactment repealed by this Code ;
(ii) [ x x x ]
(iii) a person shall be deemed to be ‘landless’ if he or his spouse
or their minor children, and Where the allottee is himself a minor, then

——————————————————————————————————————————
1. Omitted by sec. 100 (c) (ii) of U.P. Act No. 4 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
his parents hold no land or the date of allotment or within two years
immediately preceding the said date ;
(iv) the expression freedom fighter means a person so defined in
the Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Physically Handicapped,
Dependents of freedom fighters and Ex-serviceman ) Act, 1993.
(v) “other backward class” means the backward classes of
citizens specified in Schedule-1 of the Uttar Pradesh Public Services
(Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes) Act, 1994 (U. P. Act No. 4 of 1994) ;
(vi) “person of general category living below poverty line” means
such persons as may be determined from time to time by the State
Government.
(2) The land that may be allotted under sub-section (1) shall not
exceed such area as together with the land held by him as bhumidhar
or asami immediately before the allotment would aggregate to 1.26
hectares.
[Provided that preference shall be given to widow and
physically disabled person. ]
Consequences
of allotment 127. (1) Where any land is allotted to a person in accordance
with sections 125 and 126 and any tree or other improvement exists
on such land, then unless the contrary intention appears,, such tree or
improvement shall also be deemed to be allotted to the person
concerned along with the land.
(2) The allottee shall hold the land so allotted on such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed.
[Provided that if the allottee is a married man and his wife is
alive, she shall be co-allottee of equal share in the land so allotted. ]
Cancellation
of allotment
and lease 128. (1) The Collector may, of his own motion and shall on the
application of any person aggrieved, inquire in the manner prescribed
into any allotment and if he is satisfied that the allotment is in
contravention of the provisions of this Code or any of the enactments
repealed by this Code or the rules made there under he may cancel the
allotment and the lease, if any.
(a) [ * * * * ]
(b) [ * * * * ]

——————————————————————————————————————————
3. Omit. by sec. 102(b) of U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(1-A) [Under the provisions of sub section (1), an application
may be moved to the case of an allotment or lease of land made before
or after the commencement of this code, within five years from the date
of such allotment of lease.]
(2) Where the allotment or lease of any land is cancelled under
sub-section (1), the following consequences shall ensue, namely —
(a) the right, title and interest of the allottee or lessee or any
other person claiming through him in such land and in every tree or
other improvement existing thereon shall cease, and the same shall
revert to the [Gram Panchayat] ;
(b) the Collector may direct delivery of possession over such
land, tree or improvement forthwith to the [Gram Panchayat] after
ejectment of every person holding or retaining possession thereof and
may for that purpose use or cause to be used such force as may be
necessary.
(3) Where in proceedings for cancellation of allotment or lease
referred to in Clause (b) of sub-section (1) the Collector is satisfied that
nay land referred to in section 77 excepting clause (a) or clause (h) or
(i) thereof has been allotted to any person as bhumidhar with nontransferable rights, he may instead of canceling the allotment or lease,
direct that the allottee or lessee shall be treated as an asami under
clause (b) of section 125.
(4) Every order made by the Collector under this section shall
subject to the provisions of section 210, be final :
(5) The provisions of sections 5 and 49 of the Uttar Pradesh
consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 shall not apply to the proceeding
under this section.
Restoration
of possession
to allottee or
the
Government
lessee 129. (1) Where any person is admitted to any land in
accordance with section 125, or where any land is let out to any
person by the State Government and any person, other than the
allottee or lessee, is in occupation of such land in contravention of the
provisions of this Code, the Assistant Collector may, of his own motion,
and shall on the application of the allottee or the lessee as the case
may be, put him in possession of such land, and may for that purpose
use or cause to be used such force as he considers necessary.
(2) The provisions of sub-sections (2) to (8) of section 65 shall
mutatis mutandis apply in relation to reoccupation of any land or part
thereof after possession has been delivered under sub-section (1).

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]

Bhumidhar
not to be
ejected Ejectment
130. No bhumidhar shall be liable to ejectment from the land
held by him except as provided by or under this Code.
Suit for
ejectment
etc. against
asami 131. (1) No asami shall be liable to ejectment from the land
held by him, except on a suit of the landholder or [Gram Panchayat],
which may be filed on one or more of the following grounds, namely:–
(a) that the interest of the asami in the land held by him has
extinguished under the provisions of this Code ;
(b) that the asami was holding land from year to year or for a
period which has already expired or will expire before the end of the
current agricultural year;
(c) that the asami is using the land for any purpose not
permitted by section 84 ;
(d) that the land holder was suffering from any of the
disabilities referred to in sub-section (1) of section 95 and either his
disability has ceased or he wishes to bring the land under his personal
cultivation;
(e) that the asami was in arrears of rent for a period of more
than one year and has failed to pay the same to the land holder within
a period of thirty days despite service of a notice of demand ;
(f) that the asami has transferred the whole or part of the land
held by him in contravention of the provisions of this Code[.]
(2) No notice to quit to the asami shall be necessary before filing
a suit under this section.
(3) The land holder may in a suit for ejectment also claim
arrears of rent.
(4) A land holder may, without suing for ejectment sue the
assami for arrears of rent.
Right to
crops and
trees 132. (1) Where in execution of a decree passed in a suit under
ungathered crops or trees belonging to the judgment debtor exist on
the land, the court shall, not withstanding by anything contained in
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, proceed in the following manner :–
(a) if the amount due from the judgment debtor is equal to or
greater than the value of such crops or trees, the court shall deliver the
possession of the land with the crops and trees to the decree holder,

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
and all rights of the judgment-debtor in or upon such crops or trees
shall therefor pass to the decree-holder ;
(b) if the amount due from the judgment-debtor is less than the
value of such crops or trees, and—
(i) the decree-holder pays the difference between such amount
and the value to the judgment-debtor, the court shall deliver
possession of the land to the decree-holder and all rights of the
judgment-debtor in such crops or trees shall therefore pass to the
decree-holder;
(ii) the decree-holder does not pay such difference the
judgment-debtor shall have the right of tending, gathering or removing
such crops or trees or fruits of such trees, until such crops or trees
have been gathered or removed or die or are cut down, as the case may
be, paying such compensation for the use and occupation of land as
the court may fix.
(2) The court executing the decree may, on the application of
any party, determine the value of the crops or three and the
compensation payable by the judgment debtor under the provisions of
sub-section (1).
Suit for
injunction,
compensation etc. 133. The [Gram Panchayat] or the land-holder may, in lieu of
suing for ejectment of an asami under section 131, file a suit in the
Court of Sub Divisional Officer.
(a) for injunction restraining him from putting the land to any
unauthorized use or causing any waste or damage to it ;
(b) for compensation for such use, waste or damage ; or
(c) for repair of the waste or damage cause to the land.
Ejectment of
persons
occupying
land without
title 134. (1) Where a person takes or retains possession of any land
forming part of the holding of any bhumidhar or asami otherwise than
in accordance with the provisions of the law for the time being in force
and without the consent of such bhumidhar or asami, such person
shall be liable to ejectment on the suit of the bhumidhar or asami
concerned, and shall also be liable to pay damages at the rate
prescribed.
(2) To every suit relating to any land referred to in sub-section
(1), the State Government and [Gram Panchayat] shall be impleaded
as necessary parties.
135. [ X X X X ]

——————————————————————————————————————————
2. Del. by sec. 108 of U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Ejectment of
trespassers
of [Gram
Panchayat]
land 136. [ (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in other
provisions of this Code, the Sub-Divisional Officer may, of his own
motion or on the application of the Gram Panchayat or other local
authority, eject any person taking or retaining possession of any land
specified in sub-section (2), if such possession is in contravention of
the provisions of this Code and is without the consent of such Gram
Panchayat or the local authority and shall also be liable to pay
damages at the rates prescribed. ]
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to the following
categories of land, namely—
(a) any land entrusted or deemed to be entrusted to any [Gram
Panchayat] or local authority under the provisions of this Code or any
other law for the time being in force ;
(b) any land over which a [Gram Panchayat] or local authority
is entitled to take possession under the provisions of this Code ;
(c) any land which belongs to or is owned or held by a [Gram
Panchayat] or local authority ;
(d) that the asami is holding land specified in clause (d) or
clause (e) of section 77 and that the cultivation of crops in such land
has become impossible ;
(e) that the asami was admitted to the land under clause (b) of
purpose.
(3) No person shall be evicted from any land under this section
unless adequate opportunity to show cause has been afforded to him.
(4) In evicting a person under this section, the Sub-Divisional
Officer may use or cause to be used such force as may be necessary.
Explanation —For the purposes of this section, the word ’land’
includes [trees and other improvements] existing on such land.
Remedies for
wrongful
ejectment 137. (1) An asami ejected or apprehending ejectment from or
prevented from obtaining possession of any land otherwise than in
accordance with the provisions of any law for the time being in force,
may sue the person so ejecting him, trying to eject him or keeping him
out of possession—
(i) for possession of the [land ; or]
(ii) for compensation for wrongful dispossession ;

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(2) When a decree is passed for compensation for wrongful
dispossession but not for possession the compensation awarded shall
be for the whole period during which the asami was entitled to remain
in possession.

Rent payable
by an asami RENT
138. Subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be
prescribed, an asami shall, on being admitted to the occupation of any
land, be liable to pay such rent as may be agreed upon between him
and his landholder or the [Gram Panchayat], as the case may be.
Application
for fixation
of rent 139. (1) Where any person is in occupation of any land as an
asami without the rent being agreed upon, the asami or his landholder
may apply to the Tahsildar for fixation of rent.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the
Tahsildar shall make an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed,
and shall fix the rent in accordance with the rules made under this Code.
(3) The rent fixed under sub-section (2) shall be payable by the
asami with effect from the date when he occupied the land as such
asami.
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Tehsildar under
sub-section (2) may file an appeal to the Sub-Divisional Officer, and
notwithstanding anything contained in other provisions of this Code,
the order of the Sub-Divisional Officer shall be final.
Remission
for calamity
by court
decreeing
claim for
arrears 140. (1) Where the court hearing a suit for recovery of arrears
of rent is satisfied that the holding was substantially decreased by
dilution or otherwise, or the produce thereof was substantially
diminished by drought, hail, deposit of sand or other calamity during
the period for which the arrear is claimed, it may allow such remission
from the rent, as may appear to it to be just :
Provided that no such remission shall be deemed to vary the
rent payable by the asami otherwise than for the period in respect of
which it is made.
(2) Where a court allows remission under sub-section (1) the
State Government or any authority empowered by it in this behalf,
shall order consequential remission in the land revenue in accordance
with such principles as may be prescribed.
Commutation of rent 141. (1) Where the rent in respect of any holding is payable
otherwise than in cash, the Assistant Collector may, of his own motion
or on the application of the [Gram Panchayat] or the person by or to
whom the rent is payable, commute the rent in the manner prescribed.
(2) The rent commuted under sub-section (1) shall be payable
from the first day of July following the date of the order of
commutation unless the order provides for some other date.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Recovery of
arrears of rent
from asami of
Gram
Panchayat,
etc. 142. Arrears of rent due from an asami holding land from a
[Gram Panchayat] or other local authority either before or after the
commencement of this Code, shall be recoverable as an arrear of land
revenue.
Power to
write off
arrears 143. The whole or any part of the arrears of rent, in respect of
any land or other property entrusted or deemed to be entrusted to a
[Gram Panchayat] or other local authority under the provisions of this
Code may, is such circumstances as may be prescribed, be written off
as irrecoverable by the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti or by the local
authority, as the case may be, by resolution passed in that behalf :
Provided that no resolution passed by a Bhumi Prabandhak
Samiti shall take effect until it is confirmed by the Sub-Divisional
Officer.

Declaratory
suits by
tenure
holders Declaratory suits
144. (1) Any person claiming to be a bhumidhar or asami of
any holding or part thereof, whether exclusively or jointly with any
other person, may sue for a declaration of his rights in such holding or
part.
(2) In every suit under sub-section (1) instituted by or on behalf
of :—
(a) a bhumidhar, the State and the [Gram Panchayat] shall be
necessary parties ;
(b) an asami, the land-holder shall be a necessary party.
Declaratory
suit by
[Gram
Panchayat] 145. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
institute a suit against any person claiming to be entitled to any right
in any land for the declaration of the right of such person in such land,
and the court may, in its discretion, make a declaration of the right of
such person, and the [Gram Panchayat] need not in such suit ask for
any further relief.
Provision for
injunction 146. If in the course of a suit under section 144 or 145, it is
provide by affidavit or otherwise—
(a) that any property, tree or crops standing on the land in
dispute is in danger of being wasted, damaged or alienated by any
party to the suit ; or
(b) that any party to the suit threatens or intends to remove or
dispose of the said property, trees or crops in order to defeat the ends
of justice, the court may grant a temporary injunction, and where
necessary, also appoint a receiver.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
CHATPTER X
Government Lessees
Definition of
Government
lessee 147. Every person who holds, any land on lease from the State
Government, whether such lease was granted before or after the
commencement of this Code, shall be called a Government lessee in
respect of such land.
Government
lessees right
to hold land 148. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, every
Government lessee shall be entitled to hold such land in accordance
with the terms and conditions of the lease.
Ejectment of
Government
lessee 149. A Government lessee may be evicted from the land held by
him on one or more of the following grounds namely—
(a) that he has failed to pay the rent or any other sum due
under the leas within six months from the date on which it became
due ;
(b) that he has used such land for any purpose other than that
for which it was granted ;
(c) that the term of his lease has expired or the lease has been
cancelled ;
(d) that he has contravened any terms or conditions of the
lease.
Provisions of
U. P. Act no.
of 1972 to
apply 150. The provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants, Act, 1972 shall mutatis
mutandis, apply to the eviction of Government lessee as they apply to
the unauthorized occupants within the meaning of that Act, and the
Sub-Divisional Officer shall be deemed to be the prescribed authority
for the purposes of that Act.
Trespass o n
land held by
a
Government
lessee 151. (1) If a person takes or retains possession over any land,
let out to a Government lessee, otherwise than in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the lease and without the consent of such
lessee, such person shall be liable to ejectment on the suit of the
Government lessee concerned and shall also be liable to pay damages
at the rates prescribed.
(2) The State Government shall be made a party, but the Gram
Panchayat shall not be a necessary party to a suit instituted under
sub-section (1).
(3) If a suit for eviction referred to in sub-section (1) is not
instituted by a Government lessee or a decree for eviction obtained in
any such suit is not executed within the period of limitation provided
therefor, then the following consequences shall, with effect from the
expiry of such period unsure, namely—

[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(a) the person taking or retaining possession over the land let
out to the Government lessee shall be liable to eviction in accordance
with section 150 ;
(b) the right, title and interest of the Government lessee in such
land shall stand extinguished and the term of his lease shall be
deemed to have expired.
Dues
recoverable
as arrear of
land 152. Arrears of rent or any other sum due from a Government
lessee may be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.
CHATPTER XI
Assessment of Land Revenue
Land held by
bhumidhar
liable to
payment of
land revenue 153. (1) All lands held by a bhumidhar, wherever situate and to
whatever purpose applied shall be liable to assessment (by such
authority and in such manner as may be prescribed) and payment of
land revenue to the State Government :
Provided that the State Government may by notification exempt
any land, whether wholly or partially, from such liability on such terms
and conditions as it may think fit.
(2) Land revenue may be assessed on land, notwithstanding
that it has been exempted under the proviso to sub-section (1).
(3) No length of occupation shall release any land from the
liability to payment of land revenue.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1); subsection (2) or sub-section (3), the following lands shall be exempted
from the payment of land revenue, namely,–
(a) land occupied by buildings other than improvement ;
(b) grave-yards and cremation grounds.
Land revenue
payable by
bhumidhar 154. (1) Every person, who held any land as a bhumidhar from
before the date of commencement of this Code, shall pay and continue
to pay to the State Government, the same amount of land revenue
which he was liable to pay in respect of such land for the agricultural
year preceding the year in which this Code comes into force.
(2) Every person, who after such commencement, acquires
bhumidhari rights in any land shall, subject to the provisions of this
Code, pay to the State Government the same amount of land revenue
which was payable in respect of such land, immediately before the date
of such acquisition.
(3) Every person who after such commencement, acquires
bhumidhari rights in any land, where no land revenue was payable in
respect of such land immediately before the date of such acquisition,
shall be liable to pay land revenue determined by the Sub—Divisional
Officer in accordance with such principles as may be prescribed.

[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Variation of
land revenue 155. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter the
land revenue payable by a bhumidhar may be varied in the manner
prescribed on the ground of an increase or decrease in the area of his
holding or in the productivity of the land comprised therein by fluvial
action or other natural cause.
Exemption of
land revenue
in certain
cases 156. Notwithstanding anything contained in this code, every
member of a family, the total area of land held by whose members as
bhumidhar, does not exceed 1.26 hectares (3.125 acres) shall be
exempted from the liability to pay land revenue to the State
Government.
Remission or
suspension of
land revenue
on the
occurrence of
agricultural
calamity 157. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, the
State Government may, on the occurrence of an agricultural calamity
affecting the crops of any village, or part of a village, remit or suspend,
for any period, the whole or any part of the land revenue of any holding
affected by such calamity.
(2) The State Government may likewise remit or suspend, for
any period, the rent payable by an asami to the [Gram Panchayat], in
a village or part where such calamity has occurred.
Power of
state
Government
to remit rent
in certain
cases 158. Whenever the land revenue is increased or decreased
under section 155 or is remitted or suspended under section 157, the
State Government may increase or decrease or as the case may be,
remit or suspend the whole or part of any rent payable by an asami,
other than an asami of a [Gram Panchayat].
Consequences of
suspension of
rent 159. Where the payment of any rent has been suspended
under section 157,–
(a) the period during which such suspension continues shall be
excluded in computing the period of limitation allowed for a suit for
recovery of the rent, and
(b) no suit or application shall lie, for the period of such
suspension, for its recovery.
Annual
enquiry of
revenue free
land 160. (1) The Collector shall inquire annually into the case of all
lands exempted from the payment of land revenue.
(2) If the exemption has been granted on any condition and the
same has been broken, he shall report the matter to the Board for
orders, and the orders of the Board thereon shall be final.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Rounding off
the amount
of land
revenue 161. Where the amount payable on account of land revenue or
any installment thereof involves a fraction of a rupee, the same shall
be rounded off to the nearest rupee, and for this purpose, where such
amount contains a part of a rupee, then if such part is fifty paise or
more, it shall be increased to one rupee, and if such part is less than
fifty paise, it shall be ignored.
Finality of
orders 162. Every order of the State Government under this chapter
shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court.
CHATPTER XII
Collection of Land Revenue
Land
Revenue to
be the first
charge 163. (1) The land revenue assessed on any holding shall be the
first charge on such holding, and also on trees or buildings standing
thereon or the rents, profits or produce thereof.
(2) The claim of the State Government in respect of any other
sum recoverable as arrears of land revenue shall have priority over all
unsecured claims on any land against the holder thereof.
Bhumidhars
to be jointly
and severally
liable 164. All co-bhumidhars of any holding shall be jointly and
severally, liable to the State Government for the payment of land
revenue for the time being assessed thereon and all persons
succeeding whether by devolution or otherwise to the interest of such
bhumidhars shall be liable for all arrears of land revenue due in
respect of such land.
Land
Revenue
when
becomes due
and payable 165. The land revenue leviable in respect of an agricultural
year shall become due on the first day of that year, and shall be
payable at such times, in such installments, to such persons, at such
places and in such manner as may be prescribed.
Arrange ments for
collection of
land revenue 166. The State Government may make such arrangements and
employ such agency for the collection of land revenue as it may
deemed fit.
Defaulters 167. Any land revenue due and not paid on or before the date
specified in section 165 becomes there from an arrear and the persons
liable for its payment shall become defaulters.
Certified
account to be
evidence of
arrears 168. A statement of account certified by the Tahsildar shall, for
the purposes of this Chapter, be conclusive evidence of the existence of
the arrear of land revenue, of its amount and of the person who is the
defaulter.
Writ of
demand 169. As soon as an arrear of land revenue has become due, a
writ of demand may be issued by the Tahsildar against the defaulter
calling upon him to appear or to pay the amount within a time to be
specified.

[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Process for
recovery of
arrears 170. (1) An arrear of land revenue remaining unpaid within the
time specified in the write of demand, may be recovered by any one or
more of the following processes, namely,–
(a) by arrest and detention of the defaulter ;
(b) by attachment and sale of his movable property including
agricultural produce ;
(c) by attachment of any bank account or locker of the defaulter,
(d) by attachment of the land in respect of which the arrear is
due ;
(e) by lease or sale of the land in respect of which the arrear is
due ;
(f) by attachment and sale of other immovable property of the
defaulter ;
(g) by appointing a receiver of any property, movable or
immovable, of the defaulter.
Explanation— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that two or more processes hereinbefore mentioned may be issued and
enforced simultaneously or one after the other.
(2) Sums of money recoverable as arrears of land revenue, but
not due in respect of any specific land, may be recovered by processes
under this section from any immovable property of the defaulter
including any holding of which he is a [bhumidhar].
Arrest and
detention 171. (1) Any person committing default in payment of an arrear
of land revenue may be arrested and detained in custody in the Tahsil
lock-up and if there is no such lock-up, at such other place as may be
prescribed, for a period not exceeding fifteen days, unless the arrears
are sooner paid.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no
persons hall be liable to arrest or detention for an arrear of land
revenue, where and for so long as such person—
[ (a) is a woman or a minor, or a senior citizen of 65 years or
more, or a person as referred to in section 95 (1) (a) ; ]

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(b) belongs to the Armed Forces of the Union ;
(c) is exempt under section 133, 135 or 135-A of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908.
(3) No person shall be detained in custody under this section,
unless the officer issuing the arrest warrant has reason to believe that
the process of detention will compel the payment of the whole or a
substantial portion of the arrears.
(4) The officer issuing the arrest warrant may withdraw such
warrant if the defaulter pays or undertakes to pay the whole or
substantial portion of the arrears and furnished adequate security
therefor.
[ (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no
defaulter shall be arrested, unless the amount sought to be recovered
exceeds fifty thousand rupees. ]
Attachment
and sale of
movable
property 172. (1) The Sub-Divisional Officer may attach and sell
movable properties, of the defaulter including agricultural produce.
(2) The following properties shall be exempted from attachment
under sub-section (1) and sale under sub-section (5), namely—
(a) the necessary wearing apparel, cooking vessels, beds and
bedding of the defaulter, his wife and children and such personal
ornaments as, in accordance with the religious usage, cannot be
parted with by any woman ;
(b) tools of a village artisan and, if the defaulter is an
agriculturist, his implements of husbandry (except an implement
driven by mechanical power) and such cattle and seed as may in the
opinion of the attaching officer be necessary to enable him to earn his
livelihood as such ;
(c) articles set apart exclusively for the use of religious worship.
Explanation— I- For the Purposes of this sub-section, the
expression “agriculturist” means a person who cultivates land
personally and who depends for his livelihood mainly on the income
from agricultural land.
Explanation— II- For the purposes of Explanation-I a person
shall be deemed to cultivate land personally, if he cultivates land,–
(a) by his own labour ;

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(b) by the labour of any member of his family ; or
(c) by servants or labourers on wages payable in cash or in kind
or both.

(3) Where any movable property is attached by actual seizure
and the defaulter furnishes security to the satisfaction of the attaching
officer, the property so attached shall be left in the custody of the
defaulter. In case the defaulter is not available at the time of the
attachment or if he is available but fails to furnish security to the
satisfaction of the attaching officer the attached property may be left in
the custody of any responsible person who is willing to undertake its
custody :

Provided that in the case of live-stock, it may be removed to the
nearest pound if neither the defaulter furnishes such security nor any
responsible person is willing to undertake its custody.

(4) The person who undertakes the custody of any movable
property under sub-section (3) shall execute a bond (supurdnama) in
the prescribed form (which shall be exempt from stamp duty) and shall
preserve and maintain such property and produce it whenever
required. The supurdar shall be liable for all damages or loss caused to
the property given in his custody or for failure to produces it when
required. Such damages or loss shall be determined by the Sub
Divisional Officer and shall be recoverable from the supurdar as
arrears of land revenue.
(5) If the amount of arrears is not paid within a period of thirty
days from the date of attachment of movable properties under this
section, the Sub-Divisional Officer may sell the same in the manner
prescribed.
Attachment
of bank
account and
locker of the
defaulter 173. The attachment of any bank account of the defaulter
shall, so far as possible, be made by serving a garnishee order on the
manager in charge of the branch of the bank concerned in the manner
laid down in rules 46, 46-A and 46-B of Order 21 contained in the
First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and in the case of
a locker hired by the defaulter, the same shall be sealed in the
presence of such manager how shall, thereafter await further orders of
the Sub-Divisional Officer regarding preparation of inventory of its
contents and their ultimate disposal.
Attachment
of holding 174. (1) The [Collector] may attach any land in respect of
which any arrears of land revenue is due.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(2) Where the amount of arrears in respect of which attachment
was made under sub-section (1) is paid, such attachment shall stand
withdrawn.
(3) If the amount of arrears is not paid within a period of thirty
days from the date of such attachment, the Collector may proceed in
accordance with the provisions of section 175 or section 176, as the
case may be.
Lease of
holding 175. (1) Where any land is attached under section 174 the
[Collector] may, notwithstanding anything contained in this code but
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, let out the same for
such period not exceeding ten years (commencing from the first day of
July next following) as he deems fit, to any person other than the
defaulter.
(2) The person to whom any land is let out under sub-section
(1) shall be bound to pay the whole of the arrears due in respect of
such land and to pay the land revenue, during the period of lease, at
the rate payable by defaulter in respect of such land immediately
preceding its attachment.
(3) If during the period of lease, the lessee commits default in
payment of any amount due under the lease, and no other person is to
take the land on lease for the remaining period thereof then such
amount may be recovered from such lessee by anyone or more of the
processes mentioned in section 170 and the lease shall be liable to be
determined.
(4) Upon the expiry of the period of lease, the land shall be
restored to the tenure holder concerned free of any claim on the part of
the State Government for any arrear of revenue in respect of such
land.
Sale of
holding 176. (1) Where a suitable person is not forthcoming to take on
lease the land attached under section 174, or where the lease of such
land is determined under section 175, the [Collector] may sell the
whole or any part of such land in such manner as may be prescribed
and appropriate the sale proceeds in accordance with section 200.
(2) The [Collector] shall report to the [Board of Revenue] every
sale of land under sub-section (1).
Attachment
and sale of
other
immovable
property 177. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, the Collector may realize any arrears of land
revenue by [attachment and sale] of the interest of a defaulter in any
other immovable property belonging to such defaulter :
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Provided that the house or other building (with materials and
sites thereof) and the land immediately appurtenant thereto belonging
to agriculturist and occupied by him shall be exempted from
attachment under this section.
Explanation— For the purposes of this section, the expression
‘agriculturist’ shall have the meaning assigned to, it in section 172.
Appointment
of receiver 178. (1) Where any arrear of land revenue is due from any
defaulter the Collector may by order—
(a) appoint, for such period as he may deem fit, a receiver of
any movable property of the defaulter.
(b) remove any person from the possession or custody of the
property and commit the same to the possession, custody or
management of the receiver.
(c) confer upon the receiver all such powers as to bringing and
defending suits and for the realization, management, protection,
preservation and improvement of the property, the collection of the
rents and profits thereof the application and disposal of such rents
and profits and the execution of documents, as the defaulter himself
has, or such those powers as the Collector thinks fit.
(2) Nothing in this section shall authorize the Collector to
remove from the possession or custody of property any person to
whom the defaulter has not a present right to remove.
(3) The Collector may, from time to time, extend the duration of
appointment of the receiver.
(4) No order under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) shall be
made except after giving notice to the defaulter to show cause, and
after considering any representation that may be received by the
Collector in response to such notice :
Provided that an interim order under sub-section (1) or subsection (3) may be made at any time before or after the issue of such
notice :
Provided further that where an interim order is made before the
issue of such notice, the order shall stand vacated, if no notice is
issued within two weeks from the date of the interim order.
(5) The provision of rules 2 to 4 of order 40 contained in the
First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall mutatis
mutandis apply in relation to a receiver appointed under this section.
(6) The receiver shall function subject to the control of Collector
and furnish such information, returns or statements as the Collector
may deem fit.

[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(7) The Collector may by order passed in writing and without
assigning any reason, remove any receiver at any time before the
expiry of the term of such receiver and appoint any other person as
receiver in his place, if he is satisfied that continuance of that receiver
shall not be desirable or expedient on ground of inefficiency, gross
negligence, willful default, disobedience, misconduct serious omission,
or misappropriation of any property. A person removed from the
receivership under this section shall not be entitled to claim any
damages or compensation on the ground of his removal.
(8) The Collector shall have power to determine, after giving
opportunity to the receiver, what loss, if any, has been caused by the
willful default, disobedience misconduct, serious omission or gross
negligence of, or on account of any misappropriation by the receiver
and to recover the amount of loss from receiver as an arrear of land
revenue.
(9) The rent, profits or any other income from the property shall
after defraying the expenses of management including the
remuneration of the receiver, be adjusted towards discharge of the
arrears, and the balance, if any shall be paid to the defaulter.
(10) As soon as the arrears are discharged under sub-section
(9) or otherwise, the Collector shall restore the property to the
defaulter.
Procedure of
recovery 179. For the purposes of collection of land revenue or other
dues recoverable as arrears of land revenue, in accordance with this
Chapter, the recovery officer shall follow such procedure as may be
prescribed.
Recovery of
costs and
collection
charges 180. (1) The costs of any of the processes mentioned in sections
to 178 including costs of arrest and detention shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(2) The State Government may impose collection charges at a
rate, not exceeding ten percent of the amount due, as may be
prescribed :
Provided that no collection Charges shall be payable if the
amount due is paid before arrest of the defaulter or before sale of the
attached property, as the case may be.
(3) Such costs and collection charges may be added to and be
recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.
Recovery
proceedings
against legal
representatives etc. 181. (1) If at any time before or after the commencement of any
proceedings for the recovery of any arrears of land revenue under this
Chapter, the defaulter dies, the proceedings (except arrest and
detention) may be commenced or continued against the legal
representatives of the defaulter as if the legal representative were
themselves the defaulter ;

[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Provided that such legal representative shall be liable only to
the extent of the property of the deceased which has come to his or her
hands.
(2) Where any person has become surely for the amount due
from the defaulter he maybe proceeded against under this Chapter as
if he were himself the defaulter.

Attachment
of immovable
property Attachment and sale of immovable properties
182. (1) Every process of attachment of any immovable
property under section 174 or section 177, or for lease of any land
under section 175 shall be issued by the Collector.
(2) Every such attachment shall be effected in the manner
prescribed in Order XXI Rule 54 of the First Schedule to the code of
Civil Procedure, 1908.
Objection
against
attachment 183. (1) Where any claim is preferred by any person other than
the defaulter or any person claiming under him in respect of any
property attached under this Chapter, the Collector may, after an
inquiry, held after reasonable notice, admit or reject such claim :
Provided that no such claim shall be entrusted.
(a) where, before the claim is preferred the property attached
has already been sold ; or
(b) where the Collector considers that the claim is designedly or
unnecessarily delayed ; or
(c) where the claim is preferred after 30 days from the date of
attachment.
(2) The person against whom an order is made under subsection (1) may, within [sixty days] from the date of the order, prefer
an appeal before the commissioner to establish the right which he
claims to the property attached but subject to the result of such
appeal, if any the order of the Collector shall be final.
Proclamation
of sale 184. (1) Where any immovable property is sought to be sold
under the provisions of this Chapter the Collector or an Assistant
Collector authorized by him, shall issue a proclamation of the intended
sale in the form prescribed specifying therein—

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(a) the details of the property sought to be sold ;
(b) [the estimated value, reserve price and circle rate of such
property] ;
(c) the land revenue, if any payable therefor;
(d) the encumbrances, if any ;
(e) the amount of arrears for the recovery of which property is
sought to be sold ;
(f) the date, time and place of the intended sale ; and
(g) such other particulars as the Collector may think necessary.
(2) Where the area of the Land sought to be sold exceeds
[5.0586 hectares] a single proclamation may be issued under subsection (1), but the actual sale shall be made in lots of 1.26 hectares or
more.
(3) No sale shall take place until the expiry of twenty—one days
from the date on which the proclamation is issued under this section.
(4) A copy of the proclamation shall be served on the defaulter.
Affixation of
proclamation 185. A copy of the sale proclamation referred to in section 184
shall be affixed in each of the following places :—
(a) the office of the Collector ;
(b) the office of the Tahsildar of the tehsil in which the property
is situate ;
(c) some other public building in the village or the area in which
the property is situate ;
(d) the dwelling house of the defaulter.
Sale when
and by whom
made 186. (1) Every such sale shall be made by the Collector or by
the Assistant Collector authorized by him.
(2) No sale shall take place on a Sunday or other holiday
notified for State Government offices.
(3) The Collector or the Assistant Collector may, from time to
time, postpone the sale for any sufficient reason.
(4) Where a sale is postponed for a period longer than twenty
one days, or where the property is resold for default in payment of the

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
purchase money, a fresh proclamation shall be issued in the form
prescribed for the original sale.
Stoppage of
the sale 187. If the defaulter pays the arrears in respect of which the
property is to be sold together with the cost of the process at any time
before the date fixed for the sale, the officer conducting the sale shall
stop such sale.
Prohibition
to bid 188. (1) No officer having any duty to perform in connection
with any such sale and no person employed by or subordinate to such
officer shall, directly or indirectly, bid for or acquire or attempt to
acquire the property sold or any interest therein.
(2) Where no bid is offered up to the amount for which the sale
has been ordered, the Collector may order for bid upto the amount of
such arrears.
Deposit by
purchaser
and re-sale
on default 189. (1) The person declared to be the purchaser shall be
required to deposit immediately twenty five percent of the amount of
his bid, and in default of such deposit, the property shall be forthwith
re-sold, and such person shall be liable for the expenses incurred on
the first sale and any deficiency in price occurring on re-sale, and the
same may be recovered from him by the Collector as if the same were
an arrear of land revenue.
(2) A deposit under sub-section (1) may be made either in cash
or by a demand draft (issued by a scheduled bank) or partly in cash
and partly by such draft.
Explanation —For the purposes of this section, the expression
‘demand draft’ includes a banker’s cheques.
Deposit of
purchase
money 190. The balance amount of the purchase money shall be paid
by the purchaser on or before the fifteenth day from the date of the
sale in the office of the Collector or at the district treasury or subtreasury, and in case of default—
(a) the property shall be resold ; and
(b) the deposit made under section 189 shall be forfeited to the
State Government.
Auction sale
of land held
by Scheduled
Caste or
Scheduled
Tribe 191. Where the right, title or interest of a person belonging to a
scheduled caste or scheduled tribe in any land is sold by public
auction under or in accordance with the provisions of this Code, and
any other person belonging to such caste or tribe pays [an amount
equal to the amount of the highest bid and a sum equal to one percent
amount of the purchase money for payment to the purchaser,] within a

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
period of thirty days from the date of such auction, then,
notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this
Code or any other law for the time being in force, the person so offering
the amount shall be entitled to preference in the matter of sale over
and above any person not belonging to such caste or tribe :
Provided that if there are more persons than one making such
deposit, bids shall be called from them on the spot, and the highest
bidder shall be entitled to such preference :
[Provided further that where the auction sale in favour of
highest bidder is not confirmed due to the preference under this
section, he shall be entitled to receive back the money deposited by
him plus an amount equivalent to one percent of such money
deposited for that purpose.]
Application
to set aside
sale on
deposit of
arrears 192. (1) Any person whose holding or other immovable property
has been sold under this Chapter may, at any time within thirty days
from the date of sale, apply to the Collector for setting aside the sale,
on his depositing, in the office of the Collector or at the district
treasury or sub-treasury—
(a) for payment to the purchaser, a sum equal to [one percent]
of the purchase money ; and
(b) for payment on account of the arrear, the amount specified
in the sale proclamation, less any amount which may, since the date of
such proclamation, have been paid on that account ;
(c) the cost of the processes of sale including the collection
charges, if any.
(2) If the amount has been deposited in accordance with subsection (1) the Collector shall set aside the sale.
(3) Where a person has applied for setting aside the sale under
this section, he shall not be entitled to make or prosecute an
application under section 193.
Application
to set aside
sale for
irregularity 193. (1) At any time within thirty days from the date of sale,
the defaulter or the auction purchaser or any other person whose
interests are affected by such sale, may apply to the Commissioner to

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
set aside the sale on the ground of any material irregularity or mistake
in publishing or conducting it.
(2) No sale shall be set aside under sub-section (1), unless the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that he has
sustained substantial injury by reason of such irregularity or mistake.
(3) Subject to revision in the Revenue Board the order of the
Commissioner under this Section shall be final.
Confirmation
of sale 194. (1) On the expiration of thirty days from the date of sale, if
no application is made under section 192 or section 193, or if such
application has been made and rejected by the Collector or the
Commissioner, as the case may be, the Collector shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), confirm the sale.
(2) Where in a sale of immovable property made under this
Chapter, the amount of purchase money—
(a) exceeds rupees fifty lakh ; or
(b) [is less than the reserve price or the amount of arrears
specified in the sale proclamation], then the Collector shall report the
matter to the Commissioner, who may confirm the sale or may pass
such order as he thinks fit.
(3) Every order of the Collector or the Commissioner under this
section shall be final.
Setting aside
of sale by
Collector or
Commissioner 195. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 192,
case may be, has reason to believe that the sale of an immovable
property made under this Chapter ought to be set aside he may, after
notice to the auction purchaser to show cause, if any, set aside the
sale for the reasons to be recorded in writing.
Bar of claims
against
certain cases 196. If no application under section 193 is made within the
time specified therein, all claims regarding irregularity or mistake in
publishing or conducting the sale shall be barred.
Refund of
purchase
money 197. Where the sale of any property is set aside under section
or section 193, the purchaser shall be entitled to receive back his
purchase money, plus in the case mentioned in section 192, an
amount equivalent to [one percent] of such money deposited for that
purpose by the defaulter.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Certificate of
sale 198. (1) After a sale has been confirmed in accordance with
the form prescribed specifying the property sold and the name of the
person who at the time of sale was declared to be its purchaser.
(2) The certificate, duly signed and sealed by the Collector shall
be deemed to be a valid transfer of the property specified therein, and
it need not be registered as a conveyance, except as provided in section
of the Registration Act, 1908.
(3) The property specified in the certificate shall be deemed to
have vested in the purchaser on the date when it was sold, and not on
the date when the sale was confirmed.
Certified
purchaser to
be put in
possession 199. (1) The collector shall put the person declared to be the
purchaser of such property into possession, and for that purpose, he
may use or cause to be used such force as may be necessary.
(2) Nothing in this section shall authorize the Collector to
remove from the possession of any property any person whom the
defaulter had, before the issue of process, no present right to remove.
Application
of sale
proceeds 200. Where the sale of a property has been confirmed under
order —
(a) for meeting the cost of the process and the collection
charges, if any ;
(b) for payment of the arrears for the recovery whereof the
property was sold ;
(c) the balance, if any, shall be paid to the defaulter.
Summary
ejectment of
unauthorized
occupants 201. Any person taking or retaining possession of any land or
other property attached, leased or sold under this Chapter otherwise
than in accordance with the provisions of the said Chapter may be
summarily ejected by the Collector who may use or cause to be used
such force as may be necessary.
Bar of suits 202. Subject to the provisions of section 203, no suit or other
proceedings shall lie in any civil court in respect of any assessment or
collection of land revenue or the recovery of any sum recoverable as an
arrear of land revenue.
Payment
before suit 203. [xxx] Whenever proceedings are taken under this Chapter
against any person for the recovery of any arrear of land revenue, he
may pay the amount claimed to the recovery officer, and upon such
paymen the proceedings shall be stayed, and the person against

——————————————————————————————————————————
1. Omitted by sec. 156(a) of U.P. Act no. 4 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
whom such proceeding were taken may, notwithstanding anything
contained in any other provisions of this code, sue the State
Government in the civil court for the recovery of amount so paid.
Other
payments
not to be a
valid
discharge 204. No payment on account of rent or other dues in respect of
any land attached under this Chapter, make after such attachment, by
the asami or any other person in possession thereof to any person
other than the revenue officer authorized in this behalf shall operate as
a valid discharge.
Applicability
of the
Chapter 205. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the recovery
of all arrears of land revenue and all other sums recoverable as an
arrear of land revenue whether due before or after the commencement
of this Code.
CHAPTER—XIII
Jurisdiction and Procedure of Revenue Courts
Jurisdiction
of civil court
and revenue
courts 206. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, but subject to the provisions of this Code, no civil
court shall entertain any suit, application or proceeding to obtain a
decision or order on any matter which the State Government, the
Board, any revenue court or revenue officer is by or under this Code,
empowered to determine, decide or dispose of.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of subsection (1) and save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this
Code—
(a) no civil court shall exercise jurisdiction over any of the
matters specified in the Second Schedule ; and
(b) no court other than the revenue court or the revenue officer
specified in [column 3] of the Third Schedule shall entertain any Suit
application or proceeding specified in [column 2] thereof.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, an
objection that a court or officer mentioned in sub-section (2) (b) had no
jurisdiction with respect to any suit, application or preceding, shall not
be entertained by any appellate, Revisional or executing court, unless
the objection was taken before the court or officer of the first instance,
at the earliest opportunity, and in all cases where issues are settled at
or before such settlement, and unless there has been a consequent
failure of justice.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
First appeal 207. (1) Any party aggrieved by a final order or decree passed
in any suit, application or proceeding specified in [column 2] of the
Third Schedule, may prefer a first appeal to the court or officer
specified against it in [column 4], where such order or decree was
passed by a court or officer specified against it in [column 3] thereof.
(2) A first appeal shall also lie against an order of the nature
specified—
(a) in section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ; or
(b) in section 104 of the said Code ; or
(c) in Order 43 Rule 1 of the First Schedule to the said Code.
(3) The period of limitation for filing a first appeal under this
section shall be thirty days from the date of the order or decree
appealed against.
Second
appeal 208. (1) Where in any suit, application or proceeding specified
in [column 2] of the Third Schedule, any final order or decree is
passed in any first appeal filed under section 207, and any party to
such appeal is aggrieved by it, such party may prefer a second appeal
to the court specified against it in [column 5].
(2) The appellate court shall not entertain a second appeal
unless it is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of
law.
(3) The period of limitation for filing a second appeal under this
section shall be ninety days from the date of the order or decree
appealed against.
Bar against
certain
appeals 209. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 207 and
208, no appeal shall lie against any order or decree—
(a) made under [Chapter XI] of this Code ;
(b) granting or rejecting an application for condonation of delay
under section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 ;
(c) rejecting an application for [revision] ;
(d) granting or rejecting an application for stay ;
(e) remanding the case to any subordinate court ;
(f) where such order or decree is of an interim nature.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
[ (g) passed by Court or officer with the consent of parties ; or
(h) where order has been passed ex-parte or by default ;
Provided that any party aggrieved by order passed ex-parte or
by default, may move application for setting aside such order within a
period of thirty days from the date of the order ;
Provided further that no such order shall be reversed or altered
without previously summoning the party in whose favour order has
been passed to appear and be heard in support of it. ]
Power to call
for the
records [ 210. (1) The Board] or the Commissioner may call from the
record of any suit or proceeding decided by any subordinate revenue
court in which no appeal lies, [ * * * ] for the purposes of satisfying
itself or himself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed in
such suit or proceeding, and if such subordinate court appears to
have—
(a) exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law ; or
(b) failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested ; or
(c) acted in the exercise of such jurisdiction illegally or with
material irregularity ;
the Board, or the Commissioner, as the case may be, may pass such
order in the case as it or he thinks fit.
(2) If an application under this section has been moved by any
person either to the Board or to the Commissioner, no further
application by the same person shall be entertained by the other of
them.
[Explanation— For the removal of doubt it is, hereby, declared
that when an application under this section has been moved either to
the Board or to the Commissioner, the application shall not be
permitted to be withdrawn for the purpose of filing the application
against the same order to the other of them. ]
(3) No application under this section shall be entertained after
the expiry of a period of [sixty days] from the date of the order sought
to be revised or from the date of commencement of this Code,
whichever is later.

——————————————————————————————————————————
3. Omit. by sec. 162(b) of U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Board’s
power of
review 211. (1) The Board may, of its own motion or on the application
of any party interested, review any order passed by itself and pass
such orders in reference thereto as it thinks fit.
(2) No order shall be reviewed under sub-section (1), except on
the following grounds—
(a) discovery of any new and important matter or evidence ;
(b) some mistake or error apparent on the face of record ;
(c) any other sufficient reason.
(3) Orders passed on review shall not be reviewed.
[ (4) An application under sub-section (1), for review of any
order may be moved within sixty days from the date of such order. ]
Power to
transfer
cases 212. (1) Where it appears to the Board that it will be expedient
for the ends of justice to do so, it may direct that any case be
transferred from one revenue officer to another revenue officer of an
equal or superior rank in same district or any other district.
(2) The Commissioner, the Collector or the Sub-Divisional
Officer may make over any case or class of cases arising under the
provisions of this Code or any other enactment for the time being in
force, for decision from his own file to any revenue officer subordinate
to him and competent to decide such case or class of cases, or may
withdraw any case or class of cases from any such revenue officer and
may deal with such case or class of case himself or refer the same for
disposal to any other revenue officer competent to decide such case or
class of cases.
State
Government
to be
necessary
party in
certain cases 213. Subject to the provisions of this Code or the rules made
there under, the State Government shall be made a party to any suit
instituted by or against the [Gram Panchayat] or local authority under
this Code.
Applicability
of Code of
Civil
Procedure,
and
Limitation
Act, 1963 214. Unless otherwise expressly provided by or under this
Code, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and the
Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to every suit, application or
proceedings under this Code.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]

Orders not to
be invalid on
account of
irregularity
in procedure 215. No order passed by a revenue officer shall be reversed or
altered in appeal or revision on account merely of any error, omission
or irregularity in the summons, notice, proclamation, warrant or order
or other proceedings before or during any inquiry or other proceedings
under this Code, unless such error, omission or irregularity has in fact
occasioned a failure of justice.
Service of
notice 216. Any notice or other document required or authorized to be
served under this Code may be served either,—
(a) by delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served ; or
(b) by registered post addressed to that person at his usual or
last known place of abode ; or
(c) in case of an incorporated company or body, by delivering it
or sending it by registered post addressed to the secretary or other
principal functionary of the company or body at its principal officer ; or
(d) in any other manner laid down in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 for service of summons.
Revenue
Courts to
have no
power to
adjudicate
upon the
validity of
enactment 217. Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of
this Code, the Board or any other revenue court shall have no
jurisdiction in respect of a matter which involves a question as to the
validity of the provisions of this Code or any other law for the time
being in force or any rule or notification made or issued there under.
CHAPTER XIV
Miscellaneous
Power to
exempt from
the
provisions of
the Code 218. The State Government may by notification, exempt any
land owned by it or by the Central Government or by any local
authority from the application of all or any of the provisions of this
Code, and may likewise cancel or modify any such notification.
Delegation 219. The State Government may, by notification delegate to the
Board or any other officer or authority subordinate to it any of the
powers conferred on it by this Code, other than the power to make
rules, to be exercised subject to such restrictions and conditions as
may be specified in the notification.

[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Power to
enter upon
land 220. Subject to such conditions or restrictions that may be
prescribed, any officer appointed under this Code may enter at any
time upon any land with such public servants as he considers
necessary, for carrying out any of his duties under this Code, or any
other law for the time being in force.
Right to
inspect and
obtain copies 221. All documents, statements, records and registers prepared
or maintained under this Code or the rules framed thereunder shall be
open to inspection during such hours and subject to such conditions
and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed and any person
shall on payment of the prescribed fee, be entitled to obtain the
certified copy of such document or any portion of any such document,
statement record or register.
Computation
of areas in
certain
districts 222. For the purposes of computing the area fixed under any of
the provisions of this Code, one and a half hectares of land shall count
as one hectare in the following areas :—
(a) [ Jhansi division and Chitrakoot division ] ;
(b) trans-Jamuna portions of Allahabad, Etawah, Agra and
Mathura districts ;
(c) District Sonbhadra ;
(d) Tappa Upraudh and Tappa Chaurasi [ (Balai Pahar) ] of
tehsil Sadar in district Mirzapur, and
(e) Pargana Sakteshgarh and the villages mentioned in the
Fourth Schedule in hilly parties of parganas Ahraura and [ Bhagwat
of tehsil Chunar and pargana Bhagwat of tahsil Madihan ] of Mirzapur
district.
Mode of
recovery of
fines etc. 223. Any fee, fine, cost, expense, penalty or compensation
payable to or recoverable by the State Government, a [Gram
Panchayat] or other local authority under this Code or any other law
for the time being in force may, Without prejudice to any other mode of
recovery, be realised as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
Power to call
for statement 224. (1) Where any revenue officer considers it necessary for
the enforcement of the provisions of this Code, it may call upon any
tenure holder or any person in possession of any land to furnish within
such time as may be specified a statement containing the nature and
extent of his interest in the land held or possessed by him as well as by
members of his family.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(2) The tenure holder or other person referred to in sub-section
(1) may also be called upon to disclose the name and address of any
other person possessing any interest in such land including the nature
and extent of such interest.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith 225. (1) No officer or servant of the State Government shall be
liable in any civil or criminal proceeding in respect of any act done or
purporting to be done under this Code or any rules made there under,
if the act was done in good faith and in the course of execution of the
duties or the discharge of functions imposed by or under this Code.
(2) No suit or other proceeding shall lie against the State
Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused or any
injury suffered or likely to be suffered by virtue of any provisions of
this Code or by anything done or intended to be done in good faith in
pursuance of the provisions of this Code or any rules made there under.
Determina tion of
questions in
summary
proceeding [225-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in other
provisions of this Code, all the questions arising for determination in
any summary proceeding under this Code shall be decided upon
affidavits, in the manner prescribed ;
Provided that if Revenue Court or Revenue Officer is satisfied
that the cross examination of any witness, who has filed affidavit, is
necessary, it or he may direct to produce the witness for such cross
examination. ]
Lodging of
Caveat [225-B. (1) Where an application is expected to be made in any
suit, appeal, revision or other proceeding under this Code, any person
claiming the right to oppose the application, may, either personally or
through his counsel after serving a copy of caveat through registered
post on the person by whom the application is expected to be made,
lodge a caveat in the court in respect thereof.
(2) Where a caveat has been lodged and notice thereof has been
served, the applicant shall, when presenting the application in court,
furnish proof of having given prior notice in writing to the caveator or
his counsel of the date on which the application is proposed to be
presented.
(3) If any caveat is filed under this section, the entry of the
same shall be made in the register of caveat in the manner prescribed.
Constitution
of Committee [225-C. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in any other provisions of this Code or the Rules made
thereunder, the Collector shall constitute, such Committee at Gram

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Panchayat level, as may be notified by the State Government from time
to time to assist in the disposal of cases and redressed of grievances in
the manner prescribed.
(2) Every committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall
consist of a Chairman and four other members, who shall be
nominated or designated in the manner prescribed.
Provided that in each such committee, there shall be at least
one woman member, on member belonging to the Scheduled Castes or
the Scheduled Tribes and one member belonging to the Other
Backward Class. ]
Power of an
Assistant
Collector of
First Cass not
in charge of a
sub division. [ 225-D. An Assistant Collector of the first class not in charge
of a sub-division of a district shall exercise all or any of the powers
conferred on an Assistant Collector of the first class in charge of a subdivision in such cases or classes of cases as the Collector may, from
time to time, refer to him for disposal. ]
Powers of
Assistant
Collector of
second class [225-E. Assistant Collectors of the second class shall have
power to investigate and report on such case as the Collector or
Assistant Collector in charge of a sub-division of a district may, from
time to time, commit to them for investigation and report. ]
Consolidation
of cases [225-F. (1) Where more cases than one involving substantially
the same question for determination and based on the same cause of
action are pending in different courts, they shall, on application being
made by any party to the court to which all the courts concerned are
subordinate, be transferred and consolidated in one court and decided
by a single judgment.
(2) When two or more suits or proceedings are pending in the
same court, and the court is of opinion that it is expedient in the
interest of justice, it may by order direct their joint trial, where upon
all such suits and preceding may be decided upon the evidence in all
or nay of such suits or proceedings. ]
CHAPTER—XV
Penalties
Penalty for
encroachment
ect. 226. (1) Any person who,—
(a) encroaches upon or causes any obstruction to the use of
any public road (including chak road), path or common land of a
village ; or
(b) fails to comply with any order or direction made by the SubDivisional Officer under sub-section (1) of section 23 ; or

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(c) fails to comply with any order or direction made by the
Tahsildar under section 25 or section 26 ; or
(d) fails to comply with any order made under section 42 or
shall be liable to a fine which in a case referred to in clause (a) shall
[not be less than one thousand rupees and not exceed ten thousand
rupees] and in any other case shall [not be less than five hundred
rupees and not exceed five thousand rupees].
(2) Every person referred to in sub-section (1) may be required
by the Sub-Divisional Officer or the Tahsildar, as the case may be to
execute a personal bond for such sum not exceeding [fifteen thousand
rupees] as the officer concerned may deem fit for abstaining from the
repetition of such act or failure.
[Damages
for
destruction
etc. of
boundary
marks] 227. (1) If any person willfully destroys or injures or without
lawful authority removes any boundary marks lawfully erected under
Chapter IV or under any other law for the time being in force, he may
be ordered by the Tahsildar to pay such amount not exceeding [one
thousand rupees] for each mark so destroyed, injured or removed, as
may in the opinion of the Tahsildar be necessary to defray the expense
of restoring the same and of rewarding the informant, if any.
(2) The recovery of damages under sub-section (1) shall not
debar prosecution for any offence under the Indian Penal Code in
respect of such destruction, injury or removal.
Penalty for
cutting or
removing
tress illegally 228. (1) Every person who cuts removes or otherwise
appropriates any tree or any portion thereof which is the property of
the State Government or any local authority or a [Gram Panchayat],
without any authority therefor shall be liable to pay the value there of,
which shall be recoverable from him in addition to any penalty to
which he may be liable under the provisions of this Code for the
occupation of the land or otherwise and notwithstanding any criminal
proceedings which may be instituted against him in respect of such
cutting removal or appropriation.
(2) The Collector may, at any time, direct the confiscation of any
tree or portion thereof referred to in sub-section (1).
Penalty for
not furnishing
required
statement or
information
etc. 229. [Every person,—
(a) who fails to furnish any statement or information lawfully
required under the provisions of this Code; or

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(b) furnishes any statement or information which is false
and which he has reason to believe to be false; or
(c) obstructs the Collector or any other revenue officer or
Gram Panchayat in taking possession of any land in accordance
with the provisions of this Code; or
(d) obstructs any officer or public servant in doing any of the
Acts specified in Section 220; shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend to two lakh rupees. ]1
CHAPTER—XVI
Repeal and savings
Repeal 230. (1) The enactments specified in the First Schedule are
hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
real of such enactments shall not affect—
(a) the continuance in force of any such enactment in the State
of [Uttarakhand] ;
(b) the previous operation of any such enactment or anything
duly done or suffered there under ; or
(c) any other enactment in which such enactment has been
applied incorporated or referred to ; or
(d) the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything
already done or suffered or any right title or obligation or liability
already acquired accrued or incurred (including in particular the
vesting in the State of all estates and the cessation of all rights title
and interest of all the intermediaries therein) or any remedy or
proceeding in respect thereof or any release or discharge of or from any
debt, penalty, obligation. liability, claim or demand or any indemnity
already granted or the proof of any past act or thing ; or
(e) any principle or rule of law or established jurisdiction, form
or course of pleading, practice or procedure or existing usage custom,
privilege, restriction, exemption, office or appointment ;
Provided that anything done or any action taken (including any
rules, manuals, assessments, appointments and transfers made,
notifications summonses, notices, warrants, proclamations issued,
powers conferred, leases granted, boundary marks fixed, records of
rights and other records prepared or maintained, right acquired or
liabilities incurred) under any such enactment shall, in so far as they
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, be deemed to
have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this
Code, and shall continue to be in force accordingly, unless and until
they are superseded by anything done or action taken under this Code.
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Applica bility
of the Code
to pending
proceedings 231. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Code, all
cases pending before the State Government or any revenue court
immediately before the commencement of this Code, whether in
appeal, revision, review or otherwise, shall be decided in accordance
with the provisions of the appropriate law, which would have been
applicable to them had this Code not been passed.
(2) All cases pending in any civil court immediately before the
commencement of this Code which would under this Code be
exclusively triable by a revenue court, shall be disposed of by such civil
court according to the law in force prior to the date of such
commencement.
Power to
remove
difficulties 232. (1) The State Government may, for the purposes of
removing any difficulty, particularly in relation to the transition from
the provisions of the enactments repealed by this Code to the
provisions of this Code, by a notified order, direct that the provisions of
this Code shall during such period as may be specified in the order,
have effect subject to such adaptations, whether by way of
modification, addition or omission as it may deem necessary or
expedient ;
Provided that no such order shall be made after two years from
the date of commencement of this Code.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before
both the Houses of the State Legislature, as soon as may be after it is
made.
(3) No order made under sub-section (1) shall be called in
question in any court on the ground that no difficulty as is referred to
in that sub-section existed or was required to be removed.
Rules 233. (1) The State Government may by notification make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Code.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may also provide for—
(i) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and
other members of the Board ;
(ii) Regulating the distribution of business of the Board and
making territorial division of its jurisdiction ;
(iii) Guidelines for alteration, abolition or creation of revenue
areas ;
(iv) The procedure for demarcation of boundaries, the
specification, construction and maintenance of boundary marks, levy
and recovery of cost thereof ;
[ (iv-a) the procedure for survey operation and record operation

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
including demarcation of abadi by the use of available modern
technology and digitalization process ; ]
(v) The procedure of preparation and maintenance of maps,
documents, statements, records and registers under this Code,
procedure for their inspection and supply of certified copies or extracts
thereof ;
(vi) The procedure for submission of reports about succession
and transfer, by the registering authority to the Tahsildar and for
revision of village records, including proceedings for mutation and
correction of village records ;
(vii) The procedure for preparation, supply and maintenance of
Kisan Bahi and matters connected therewith, including fees to be
charged therefore ;
(viii) The procedure, regarding plantation of trees on the sides of
public roads paths or canals, and determination of disputes regarding
trees in abadi and unoccupied land ;
(ix) The protection, preservation and disposal of properties
belonging to or vested in the State Government, [Gram Panchayat] or
other local authority, including determination of compensation for
damages misappropriation or wrongful occupation there of ;
(x) The principles for assessment of land revenue, including its
variation, remission, suspension, and apportionment ;
(xi) The procedure for collection of land revenue and other
public moneys, and the matters connected with the execution of
various, processes therefor, including the fixation of costs and
collection charges ;
(xii) The procedure regarding fixation and commutation of rent,
including circumstances in which the arrears of rent could be written
off ;
(xiii) The procedure for appointment of legal practitioners in
litigation relating to a [Gram Panchayat] or a Bhumi Prabandhak
Samiti, and the terms and conditions of such appointment ;
(xiv) The procedure relating to the conduct and prosecution of
suits, appeals and other proceedings, including the procedure of
conducting various inquiries under the provisions of this Code ;
(xv) The procedure for grating lease by the Collector,
cancellation of such lease and eviction of unauthorized occupants from
the land belonging to the State Government, [Gram Panchayat] and
local authority ;

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(xvi) The procedure regarding allotment of land entrusted to the
[Gram Panchayat], restoration of possession to the allottee and
cancellation of such allotment ;
(xvii) The duties of any officer or authority having jurisdiction
under this Code and the procedure to be followed by him ;
(xviii) Imposition of limits of time within which any act specified
under this Code has to be performed ;
(xix) The fees to be aid in respect of suits, appeals, applications
and other proceedings under this Code ;
(xx) The regulation of fishing in rivers, lakes, ponds and tanks
entrusted to a [Gram Panchayat] or other local authority ;
(xxi) The regulation of pasture lands, cremation or burial
grounds, and catching, hunting and shooting of animals and birds in
villages ;
(xxii) Any other matter for which rules are required to be or may
be made under this Code.
(3) The rules and orders made by the State Government or the
Board before the commencement of this Code, under any of the
enactments repealed and in force on the date of such commencement,
shall except to the extent of inconsistency with the provisions thereof,
continue to be in force, until they are rescinded altered or substituted
in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
(4) It shall be lawful for the State Government in making rules
under this section, to prescribe that any person committing a breach
of the same shall in addition to any other consequences that would
ensue from such breach, be punishable with such fine not exceeding
[twenty five thousand rupees] as the officer or authority specified for
the purpose may deem fit to impose.
Regulations 234. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Code and the rules
made there under, the Board may, with the previous approval of the
State Government, make regulations—
(a) governing the procedure of the revenue courts and the
revenue officers in respect of suits, applications and proceedings under
this Code ;
(b) containing directions for the preparation, maintenance and
supervision of land records and matters connected therewith ;

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
(c) prescribing the duties of Tehsildars and Naib-Tehsildars and
regulating their posting, transfers and their appointment in temporary
vacancies ;
[ (d) procedure for issuing licences to the petition writers ;
(e) such other matters as may be prescribed by rules. ]
(2) All regulations made in accordance with sub-section (1)
shall have the force of law.
[ (3) The Revenue Court Manual, the Land Records Manual,
Collection Manual and Land Revenue (Survey and Record Operation)
Rules, 1978, in force on the date of commencement of this Code, shall
continue to remain in force, to the extent they are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Code, until amended, rescinded or repealed
by any regulations made under this section. ]
—————
FIRST SCHEDULE
(See Sections 2 and 230)
LIST—A
Enactments of general application
—————————————————————————————————————————-
Serial Name of the enactments repealed
No.
—————————————————————————————————————————-
—————————————————————————————————————————-
1. The United Provinces Revenue Officers Regulation, 1803
2. The Bengal Indigo Contracts Regulation 1823 (Bengal Regulation No. 6 of
1823)
3. The Bengal Indigo Contracts Regulation Act, 1830 (Bengal Regulation No. 5
of 1830)
4. The Bengal Land Revenue (Settlement and Deputy Collectors) Regulation,
(Bengal Regulation No. 9 of 1833)
5. The Bengal Indigo Contracts Act, 1836 (Act No. 10 of 1836)
6. The Bundelkhand Alienation of Land Act, 1903 (Act No. 2 or 1903)
7. Benaraes Family Domains Act, 1904 (Act No. iii of 1904)

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
Serial Name of the enactments repealed
No.
—————————————————————————————————————————-
—————————————————————————————————————————-
8. Uttar Pradesh Merged States (Application of Law) Act, 1950 (Act No. 8 of
1950)
9. Dudhi Robertsganj (District Mirzapur) Agriculturists Debts Relief Act, 1951
(U. P. Act No. 32 of 1951)
10. The United Provinces Land Revenue Act, 1901
11. The Pargana of Kaswar Raja Act, 1911
12. The Pargana of Kaswar Raja Act, 1915
13. The Gorakhpur Goraits Act, 1919
14. The United Provinces Board of Revenue Act, 1922
15. The U. P. Abatement of Rent Suits Act, 1938
16. The U. P. Hindu Woman’s Right to Property (Extension to Agricultural
Lands) Act, 1942
17. The U. P. Village Abadi Act, 1947
18. The U. P. Agricultural Tennats (Acquisition of Privileges) Act, 1949
19. The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950
20. The Rampur Stay of Ejectment Suits and Proceeding Act, 1951
21. The U. P. Commission of Rent (Regulation of Proceedings) Act, 1952
22. The U. P. Stay of Suits and Proceedings (Mirzapur) Act, 1952
23. The Uttar Pradesh Land Reforms (Supplementary) Act, 1952
24. The Rampur Thekedari and Pattedari Abolition Act, 1953
25. The Uttar Pradesh Urban Areas Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act,

26. The Uttar Pradesh Land Reforms (Evacuee Land) Act, 1957
27. The Uttar Pradesh Government Estates Thekedari Abolition Act, 1958
28. The U. P. Recovery of Government Dues (Acquired Estates and Determined
Leases) Act, 1960
29. The U. P. Malguzari Tatha Lagan Par Apatik Adhibhar Adhiniyam, 1965
30. The Uttar Pradesh Board of Revenue (Regulation of Procedure) Act, 1966
31. The Uttar Pradesh Government Estates Thekedari Abolition (Re-enactment
and Validation) Act, 1970
32. The Uttar Pradesh land Tenures (Regulation of transfer) (Re-enactment and
Validation) Act, 1972

[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
LIST—B
Enactments having special reference to territories
now comprised in the State of Uttarakhand
1. Almora Honorary Assistant Collector’s Decrees, and Orders Validating Act,

2. Jaunsar Bawar Security of Tenure and Land Records Act, 1952
3. Kumaun Agricultural Lands (Miscellaneous Provision) Act, 1954
4. Jaunsar-Bawar Pargana (District Dehradun) Revenue Officials (Special
Powers) Act, 1958
5. Jaunsar Bawar Jamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1956
6. Kumaun and Uttarakhand Zamindari Abolition and Land Reform Act, 1960
7. Kumaun and Garhwal Water (Collection, Retention and Distribution) Act,

—————
SECOND SCHEDULE
[ See Sections 206 (2) (a) ]
Matters excluded from the jurisdiction of the Civil Court
1. Any question regarding the demarcation of boundaries of fixing of boundary
marks.
2. Any claim to question a decision determining abadi made by the Collector.
3. Any claim to have any entry made in any revenue record or to have any such
entry omitted.
4. Any question regarding the assessment, remission or suspension of land
revenue or rent.
5. Any claim connected with or arising out of the collection by the state
Government or the enforcement by such Government of any process for the
recovery of land revenue or any sum recoverable as an arrear of land
revenue under this Code or any other law for the time being in force.
6. Any claim against the vesting of any property in the State Government,
[Gram Panchayat] or other local authority under this Code.
7. Any question relating to the levy or imposition of a fine, cost, expense,
charge, penalty or compensation under this Code.
8. Any question regarding re-instatement of a bhumidhar or asami wrongfully
ejected or dispossessed from any land.
9. Any claim to compel the performance of any duty imposed by this Code on
any revenue officer appointed under this Code.

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
10. Any question, relating to division, creation amalgamation, abolition or readjustment of revenue areas and Lekhpal’s circles under Chapter II.
[11. Any question relating to the allotment of land referred to in section 64 or
12. Any claim to question a direction issued by the Collector under section 71.]
13. Any claim to question the delivery of possession over any land and part
thereof referred to in section 124, or the eviction of any person under
14. Any claim to question the validity of any order made by the State
Government under Chapter XI.
15. Any claim regarding possession over any land.
16. Any claim to establish the rights of a co-tenure-holder in respect of any
land.
————
THIRD SCHEDULE
(See Sections 206, 207 and 208)
—————————————————————————————————————————-
Section Description of suit
application or
proceedings Court or
Officer of
original
jurisdiction First Appeal Second
Appeal
—————————————————————————————————————————--
Boundary and
boundary marks Sub-Divisional
Officer Commissioner —
Mutation cases Tahsildar Sub-Divisional
Officer [****]
54,56,57 Disputes relating to
trees Collector Commissioner —
Eviction of illegal
occupier from land of
[Gram Panchayat] [Assistant
Collector] [Collector] —

——————————————————————————————————————————
2. Omit. by third sec. 188(a) of U. P. Act no. 04 of 2016.
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]

(2) (c) Suit for ejectment by a
bhumidhar against the
person in possession of
any land on the basis
of a contract or lease Sub-Divisional
Officer Commissioner Board
(1) Suit for ejectment by
[Gram Panchayat]
against a bhumidhar
with non-transferable
rights Do Do Do
(2) Suit for ejectment by a
land holder against an
asami Do Do Do
(2) Suit for partition by a
disabled co-sharer Do Do Do
Suit for division of a
holding Do Do Do
(1) Suit for ejectment of an
asami Do Do Do
(4) Suit for recovery of
arrears or rent against
an asami [Sub-Divisional Officer] Collector Nil
Suit for injunction,
compensation etc. [Sub-Divisional Officer] Collector Nil
Suit for ejectment
against a person
occupying land without
title or for damages or
for both Sub-Divisional
Officer Commissioner Board
(1) Suit for possession,
compensation or
injunction Do Do Do
(1) Application for fixation
of rent Tahsildar Sub-Divisional
Officer Nil
(1) Application for
commutation of rent Sub-Divisional
Officer Collector Nil
Suit for declaration by
bhumidhar or asami Do Commissioner Board

——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]
145 Suit for declaration by
[Gram Panchayat] Do Do Do
(1) Suit by a Government
lessee for ejectment or
for damages or both Do Do Do
—————————————————————————————————————————--
Note— The suits appearing in the entries relating section 82 (2) (c) to
be heard and decided also by any Assistant Collector, First Class (other than the
Sub-Divisional Officer) to whom the case may be transferred by general or special
order of the Collector.
—————
FOURTH SCHEDULE
(See Sections 222)
LIST—A
List of village of Pargana Ahraura
1. Amdih
2. Baghor
3. Baghri
4. Bantara
5. Bat
6. Bhawanipur
7. Dhotwa
8. Ghurahi
9. Kharmalhria
10. Khan Arzampur 11. Kutlupur
12. Lohra
13. Maddhupur
14. Majhui
15. Mubarakpur
16. Magnar Haraiya
17. Pavahi
18. Sukrut
19. Takia
——————————————————————————————————————————
[The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, 2006]

LIST—B
List of village of Pargana Bhagwat
[1. Ban Imlis,
2. Jargal Mahal,
3. Semra Barho,
4. Khatkharia,
5. Koharadih,
6. Talar,
7. Chit Bisram,
8. Padarwa,
9. Hinauta, 10. Nibia,
11. Rampur Barho,
12. Sonbarsa,
13. Bisumpura,
14. Khamhria,
15. Purainia,
16. Nikerika,
17. Dhansiria,
18. Garhwa, ]

——————
At present as many as 39 Acts relating to revenue law are enforced in the
State of Uttar Pradesh. Out of these Acts, Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and
Land Reforms Act, 1950 and U. P. Land Revenue Act, 1901 are the important Acts,
Several enactments were enacted during the British regime. Most of the provisions of
those have become absolute. Some of the provisions of those enactments are
inconsistent with each other. On account of different provisions in different
enactments relating to revenue law, the revenue litigations have considerably
increased. Consequently the revenue cases are pending for disposal for a very long
period. Under these circumstances it has become necessary to consolidate with
modifications of relevant provisions of all these enactments into single enactment. It
has, therefor, been decided to provide for consolidating and amending the laws
relating to land-tenures and land revenue in the State and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto. The U. P. Revenue Code Bill, 2006 has, therefor,
been prepared to fulfill the above mentioned requirements.
The Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code Bill, 2006, is introduced accordingly.

——————
——————————————————————————————————————————