An Act to make provisions for levy and collection of tax on intra -State
supply of goods or, services or, both in the State of Maharashtra
and the matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS, it is expedient to make provisions for levy and collection of tax on intra -State supply
of goods or, services or, both in the State of Maharashtra and the matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto ; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty -eighth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement. –– (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Goods
and Services Tax Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Maharashtra.
(3) It shall come into force on such 2date as the State Governme nt may, by notification in the
Official Gazette , appoint:
Provided that different 3dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the
coming into force of that provision.
2. Definitions. –– In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ––
(1) “actionable claim” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 3 of the Transfer of
Property Act, 18 82 (4 of 1882) ;
(2) “address of delivery” means the address of the recipient of goods or services or both indicated
on the tax invoice issued by a registered person for delivery of such goods or services or both ;
(3) “address on record” means the address of the recipient as available in the records of the
supplier ;
(4) “adjudicating authority” means any authority, appointed or authorised to pass any order or
decision under this Act, but does not include the Commissioner, Revisional Authority, the Authority for
Advance Rulin g, the Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling, [the Appellate Authority, the Appellate
Tribunal and the Authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 171] ;
(5) “agent” means a person, including a factor, broker, commission agent, arhatia , del crede re
agent, an auctioneer or any other mercantile agent, by whatever name called, who carries on the business
of supply or receipt of goods or servic es or both on behalf of another ;
(6) “aggregate turnover” means the aggregate value of all taxable supplies (excluding the value of
inward supplies on which tax is payable by a person on reverse charge basis), exempt supplies, exports
of goods or services or both and inter -State supplies of persons having the same Permanent Account
Number, to be computed on all India basis but excludes Central tax, State tax, Union territo ry tax,
integrated tax and cess ;

Extraordinary, Part V -A, pages 113 -115, dated 12th May 2017.
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 139, 146 and 164 came into force w.e.f . 22nd June 2017 vide
Government Notification, Finance Department No. GST 1017/CR 94(A)/Taxation -1, dated the 21st June 2017.
Sections 6 to 9, 11, 21, 31 to 41, 42 except the proviso to sub -section ( 9) of section 42, 43 except the proviso to
sub-section ( 9) of section 43, 44 to 50, 53 to 138, 140 to 145, 147 to 163, 165 to 174 came into force w.e.f . 1st July 2017
vide Government Notification, Finance Department No. MGST. 1017/CR 103/Taxation -1, dated the 29th June 2017.
These words, brackets and figures were substituted for the words “the Appellate Authority and the Appellate Tribunal”
by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 2( a), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(7) “agriculturist” means an individual or a Hindu Undivided Family who undertakes
cultivation of land —
(a) by own labour, or
(b) by the labour of family, or
(c) by servants on wages payable in cash or kind or by hired labour under personal supervision
or the personal supervis ion of any member of the family ;
(8) “Appellate Authority” means an authority appointed or authorised to hear appeal s as referred
to in section 107 ;
(9) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Goods and Services Tax Appellate Trib unal referred to in
(10) “appointed day” means the date on which the provisions of this Act shall come into force ;
(11) “assessment” means determination o f tax liability under this Act and includes
self-assessment, re -assessment, provisional assessment, summary assessmen t and best judgement
assessment ;
(12) “associated enterprises” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 92A of the
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) ;
(13) “audit” means the examination of records, returns and other documents maintained or
furnished by the registered person under this Act or the rules made thereunder or under any other law for
the time being in force to veri fy the correctness of turnover declared, taxes paid, refund claimed and
input tax credit availed, and to assess his compliance with the provisions of this A ct or the rules made
thereunder ;
(14) “authorised bank” shall mean a bank or a branch of a bank aut horised by the Central
Government to collect the tax or any othe r amount payable under this Act ;
(15) “authorised representative” means the representative a s referred to under section 116 ;
(16) “Board” means the [Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Cust oms] constituted under the
Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 (54 of 1963) ;
(17) “business” includes ––
(a) any trade, commerce, manufacture, profession, vocation, adventure, wager or any other
similar activity, whether or no t it is for a pecuniary benef it;
(b) any activity or transaction in connection with or incidental or ancillary to
sub-clause ( a);
(c) any activity or transaction in the nature of sub -clause ( a), whether or not there is volume,
frequency, continuity or regularity of such transaction ;
(d) supply or acquisition of goods including capital goods and services in connection with
commencement or closure of business ;
(e) provision by a club, association, society, or any such body (for a subscription or any other
consideration) of the facil ities or benefits to its members ;
(f) admission, for a considerat ion, of persons to any premises ;
(g) services supplied by a person as the holder of an office which has been accepted by him
in the course or furtherance of hi s trade, profession or vocatio n;
[(h) activities of a race club including by way of totalisator or a license to book maker or
activit ies of a licensed book maker in such club; and]

These words were substituted for the words “Central Board of Excise and Customs” by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 2( b), w.e.f .
1st Februar y 2019.
This sub -clause was substituted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 2( c), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.

(i) any activity or transaction undertaken by the Central Government, a State Government or
any local authority in which they ar e engaged as public authorities ;
[* * *]
(19) “capital goods” means goods, the value of which is capitalised in the books of account of the
person claiming the input tax credit and which are used or intended to be used in the co urse or furtherance
of business ;
(20) “casual taxable person” means a person who occasionally undertakes transactions involving
supply of goods or services or both in the course or furtherance of business, whether as principal, agent
or in any other capac ity, in the taxable territory where he has no fixed place of business ;
(21) “central tax” means the central goods and services tax levied under section 9 of the Cen tral
Goods and Services Tax Act ;
(22) “cess” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Goods and Services T ax
(Compensation to States) Act ;
(23) “chartered accountant” means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Acc ountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) ;
(24) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of State tax appointed under section 3 and includes
the Principal Commissioner or Chief Commissioner of Stat e tax appointed under section 3 ;
(25) “Commissioner in the Board” means the Commissioner referred to in section 168 of the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act ;
(26) “common portal” means the common goods and services tax electronic po rtal referred to in
(27) “common working days” shall mean such days in succession which are not declared as
gazetted holidays by the Centr al Government o r the Government of Maharashtra ;
(28) “company secretary” means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of
(29) “competent authority” means such authorit y as ma y be notified by the Government ;
(30) “composite supply” means a supply made by a taxable person to a recipient consisting of two
or more taxable supplies of goods or services or both, or any combination thereof, which are naturally
bundled and sup plied in conjunction with each other in the ordinary course of business, one of which is
a principal supply.
Illustration. — Where goods are packed and transported with insurance, the supply of goods,
packing materials, transport and insurance is a composi te supply and supply of goods is a principal
supply ;
(31) “consideration” in relation to the supply of goods or services or both includes ––
(a) any payment made or to be made, whether in money or otherwise, in respect of, in response
to, or for the inducement of, the supply of goods or services or both, whether by the recipient or by
any other person but shall not include any subsidy given by the Central G overnment or a State
Government ;
(b) the monetary value of any act or forbearance, in respect o f, in response to, or for the
inducement of, the supply of goods or services or both, whether by the recipient or by any other
person but shall not include any subsidy given by the Central Government or a State Government:
Provided that a deposit given in respect of the supply of goods or services or both shall not be
considered as payment made for such supply unless the supplier applies such deposit as
consideration for the said supply ;
(32) “continuous supply of goods” means a supply of goods which is pr ovided, or agreed to be
provided, continuously or on recurrent basis, under a contract, whether or not by means of a wire, cable,

The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
pipeline or other conduit, and for which the supplier invoices the recipient on a regular or periodic basis
and includes suppl y of such goods as the Government may, subject to such conditions, as it may, b y
notification, specify ;
(33) “continuous supply of services” means a supply of services which is provided, or agreed to be
provided, continuously or on recurrent basis, under a contract, for a period exceeding three months with
periodic payment obligations and includes supply of such services as the Government may, subject to
such conditions, as i t may, by notification, specify ;
(34) “conveyance” includes a ve ssel, an aircraft and a vehicle ;
(35) “cost accountant” means a cost accountant as defined in [clause ( b)] of sub -section ( 1) of
(36) “Council” means the Goods and Services Tax Council established under article 279A of the
Constitution ;
(37) “credit note” means a document issued by a registered person under sub -section ( 1) of
(38) “debit note” means a document issued by a registered person under sub -section ( 3) of
(39) “deeme d exports” means such supplies of goods as may be notified under
(40) “designated authority” means such authority as may be notified by the Commissioner ;
(41) “document” includes written or printed record of any sort and electronic record a s defined in
clause ( t) of section 2 of the Information Te chnology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) ;
(42) “drawback” in relation to any goods manufactured in India and exported, means the rebate of
duty, tax or cess chargeable on any imported inputs or on any domes tic inputs or input services used i n
the manufacture of such goods ;
(43) “electronic cash ledger” means the electronic cash ledger referred to in sub -section ( 1) of
(44) “electronic commerce” means the supply of goods or services or both, including digital
products ove r digital or electronic network ;
(45) “electronic commerce operator” means any person who owns, operates or manages digital or
electronic facility or p latform for electronic commerce ;
(46) “electronic credit ledger” means th e electronic credit ledger referred to in sub -section ( 2) of
(47) “exempt supply” means supply of any goods or services or both which attracts nil rate of tax
or which may be wholly exempt from tax under section 11, or under section 6 of the I ntegrated Goods
and Services Tax Act, and includes non -taxable supply ;
(48) “existing law” means any law, notification, order, rule or regulation relating to levy and
collection of duty or tax on goods or services or both passed or made before the commenc ement of this
Act by the Legislature or any Authority or person having the power to make such law, notifica tion, order,
rule or regulation ;
(49) “family” means, —
(i) the spouse and children of the person, and
(ii) the parents, grand -parents, brothers and sisters of the person if they are wholly or main ly
dependent on the said person ;
(50) “fixed establishment” means a place (other than the registered place of business) which is
characterised by a sufficient degree of permanence and suitable structure in te rms of human and technical
resources to supply services, or to receive and use services for its own needs ;

These word, brackets and letter were substituted for the words, brackets and letter “clause ( c)” by Mah. 67 of 2018,
s. 2(e), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.

(51) “Fund” means the Consumer Welfare Fu nd established under section 57 ;
(52) “goods’’ means every kind of movable property other than money and s ecurities but includes
actionable claim, growing crops, grass and things attached to or forming part of the land which are agreed
to be severed before suppl y or under a contract of supply ;
(53) “Government” mean s the Government of Maharashtra ;
(54) “Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act” means the Goods and Services Tax
(Compensation to States) Act, 2017 (15 of 2017) ;
(55) “goods and services tax practitioner” means any person who has been approved under section
to act as suc h pract itioner ;
(56) “India” means the territory of India as referred to in article 1 of the Constitution, its territorial
waters, seabed and sub -soil underlying such waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone or any
other maritime zone as referred to in the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone
and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976), and the air space above its t erritory and territorial
waters ;
(57) “Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act” means the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act,
(13 of 2017) ;
(58) “integrated tax” means the integrated goods and services tax levied under the Integr ated Goods
and Services Tax Act ;
(59) “input” means any goods other than capital goods used or intended to be used by a supplier in
the co urse or furtherance of business ;
(60) “input service” means any service used or intended to be used by a supplier in the co urse or
furtherance of business ;
[(61) “Input Service Distributor” means an office of the supplier of goods or services or both which
receives tax invoices towards the receipt of input services , including invoices in respect of services liable
to tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 9 [of this Act or under sub -section ( 3) or
sub-section ( 4) of section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act,] for or on behalf of distinct
persons referred to in section 25, and liable to distribute the input tax credit in respect of such invoices
in the manner provided in section 20];
(62) “input tax” in relation t o a registered person, means the central tax, State tax, integrated tax or
Union territory tax charged on any supply of goods or services or both made to him and includes —
(a) the integrated goods and services tax charged on import of goods ;
(b) the tax p ayable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 9 ;
(c) the tax payable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 5 of the
Integr ated Goods and Services Tax Act ; or
(d) the tax payable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 9 of the Central
Goods and Services Tax Act,
but does not include the tax paid under the composition levy ;
(63) “input tax credit ” means the credit of input tax ;
(64) “intra -State supply of goods” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 8 of the
Integr ated Goods and Services Tax Act ;
(65) “intra -State supply of services” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 8 of
the Integr ated Goods and Services Tax Act ;
(66) “invoice” or “tax invoice” means the tax in voice referred to in section 31 ;

This clause was substituted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 2, w.e.f . 1st April 2025.
These words, brackets and figures were inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 1st April 2025
by Mah. 39 of 2025, s. 2( i).
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(67) “inward supply” in relation to a person, shall mean receipt of goods or services or both whether
by purchase, acquisition or any other means , with or without consideration ;
(68) “job work” means any treatm ent or process undertaken by a person on goods belonging to
another registered person and the expression “job worker” shall be construed accordingly ;
(69) “local authority” means ––
(a) a “Panchayat” as defined in clause ( d) of article 243 of the Constitution ;
(b) a “Municipality” as defined in clause ( e) of a rticle 243P of the Constitution ;
(c) a Municipal Committee, a Zilla Parishad , a District Board, and any other authority legally
entitled to, or entrusted by the Central Government or any Sta te Government with the control or
management of a municipa l [fund] or local fund ;
[Explanation .— For the purposes of this sub -clause, —
(a) “local fund” means any fund under the control or management of an authority of a
local self -government established for discharging civic functions in relation to a Panchayat
area and vested by law with the powers to levy, collect and appropriate any tax, d uty, toll,
cess or fee, by whatever name called;
(b) “municipal fund” means any fund under the control or management of an authority
of a local self -government established for discharging civic functions in relation to a
Metropolitan area or Municipal are a and vested by law with the powers to levy, collect and
appropriate any tax, duty, toll, cess or fee, by whatever name called;]
(d) a Cantonment Board as defined in section 3 of the Cant onments Act, 2006
(41 of 2006) ;
(e) a Regional Council or a Distric t Council constituted under the Six th Schedule to the
Constitution ;
(f) a Development Board constituted under article 371 [and article 371 J] of the
Constitution ; or
(g) a Regional Council constituted under a rticle 371A of the Constitution ;
(70) “locat ion of the recipient of services” means, —
(a) where a supply is received at a place of business for which the registration has been
obtained, the loc ation of such place of business ;
(b) where a supply is received at a place other than the place of busine ss for which registration
has been obtained (a fixed establishment elsewhere), the locat ion of such fixed establishment ;
(c) where a supply is received at more than one establishment, whether the place of business
or fixed establishment, the location of t he establishment most directly concerned with the receipt
of the supply ; and
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual plac e of residence of the recipient ;
(71) “location of the supplier of services” means, —
(a) where a supply is made from a place of business for which the registration has been
obtained, the loc ation of such place of business ;
(b) where a supply is made from a place other than the place of business for which registration
has been obtained (a fixed establishment elsewhe re), the locat ion of such fixed establishment ;

(c) where a supply is made from more than one establishment, whether the place of business
or fixed establishment, the location of the establishment most directly concerned wi th the
provisions of the supply ; and
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual pla ce of residence of the supplier ;
(72) “manufacture” means processing of raw material or inputs in any manner that results in
emergence of a new product having a distinct name, character and use and the term “manufacturer” shall
be constr ued accordingly ;
(73) “market value” shall mean the full amount which a recipient of a supply is required to pay in
order to obtain the goods or services or both of like kind and quality at or about the same time and at the
same commercial level where the recipient a nd the supplier are not related ;
(74) “mixed supply” means two or more individual supplies of goods or services, or any
combination thereof, made in conjunction with each other by a taxable person for a single price where
such supply does not constitute a composite supply.
Illustration : A supply of a package consisting of canned foods, sweets, chocolates, cakes, dry
fruits, aerated drinks and fruit juices when supplied for a single price is a mix ed supply. Each of these
items can be supplied separately and is not dependent on any other. It shall not be a mixed supply if thes e
items are supplied separately ;
(75) “money” means the Indian legal tender or any foreign currency, cheque, promissory note , bill
of exchange, letter of credit, draft, pay order, traveller cheque, money order, postal or electronic
remittance or any other instrument recognized by the Reserve Bank of India when used as a consideration
to settle an obligation or exchange with Ind ian legal tender of another denomination but shall not include
any currency that i s held for its numismatic value ;
(76) “motor vehicle” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) ;
(77) “non -resident taxable person” means any person who occasionally undertakes transactions
involving supply of goods or services or both, whether as principal or agent or in any other capacity, but
who has no fixed place of business or residence in Ind ia;
(78) “non -taxable supply’’ means a supply of goods or services or both which is not leviable to tax
under this Act or under the Integr ated Goods and Services Tax Act ;
(79) “non -taxable territory” means the territory which i s outside the taxable terri tory;
(80) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expressions
‘notify’ and ‘notified’ shall be construed accordingly ;
[(80A) “online gaming” means offering of a game on the internet or an electronic network and
includes online money gaming ;
(80B) “online money gaming” means online gaming in which players pay or deposit money or
money’s worth, including virtual digital assets, i n the expectation of winning money or money’s worth,
including virtual digital assets, in any event including game, scheme, competition or any other activity
or process, whether or not its outcome or performance is based on skill, chance or both and whethe r the
same is permissible or otherwise under any other law for the time being in force ;]
(81) “other territory” includes territories other than those comprising in a State and those referred
to in sub -clauses ( a) to ( e) of clause ( 114);
(82) “output tax” in relation to a taxable person, means the tax chargeable under this Act on taxable
supply of goods or services or both made by him or by his agent but excludes tax payable by him on
reverse charge basis ;

The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(83) “outward supply” in relation to a taxable pe rson, means supply of goods or services or both,
whether by sale, transfer, barter, exchange, licence, rental, lease or disposal or any other mode, made or
agreed to be made by such person in the co urse or furtherance of business ;
(84) “person” includes —
(a) an individual ;
(b) a Hindu Undivided Family ;
(c) a company ;
(d) a firm ;
(e) a Limited Liab ility Partnership ;
(f) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, in India or
outside India ;
(g) any corporation established by or under any Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act or a
Government company as defined in clause ( 45) of section 2 of the Co mpanies Act, 2013
(18 of 2013) ;
(h) any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a country outside Ind ia;
(i) a co -operative society registered under any law rel ating to co -operative societies ;
(j) a local authority ;
(k) Central G overnment or a State Government ;
(l) society as defined under the Societies Regi stration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) ;
(m) trust ; and
(n) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the above ;
(85) “place of business” includes ––
(a) a place from where the business is ordinarily carried on, and includes a warehouse, a
godown or any other place where a taxable per son stores his goods, supplies or rec eives goods or
services or both ; or
(b) a place where a taxable person maintains his books of account ; or
(c) a place where a taxable person is engaged in business through an agent, by whatever name
called ;
(86) “pla ce of supply” means the place of supply as referred to in Chapter V of the Integr ated Goods
and Services Tax Act ;
(87) “prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act on the recommendations of the
Council ;
(88) “principal” means a person on w hose behalf an agent carries on the business of supply or
receipt of goods or services or both ;
(89) “principal place of business” means the place of business specified as the principal place of
business in the certificate of registration ;
(90) “principal supply” means the supply of goods or services which constitutes the predominant
element of a composite supply and to which any other supply forming part of tha t composite supply is
ancillary ;
(91) “proper officer” in relation to any function to be performed under this Act, means the
Commissioner or the officer of the State tax who is assigned th at function by the Commissioner ;
(92) “quarter” shall mean a period comprising three consecutive calendar months, ending on the
last day of March, June, September and December of a calendar year ;

(93) “recipient” of supply of goods or services or both, means —
(a) where a consideration is payable for the supply of goods or services or both, the person
who is l iable to pay that consideration ;
(b) where n o consideration is payable for the supply of goods, the person to whom the goods
are delivered or made available, or to whom possession or use of the g oods is given or made
available ; and
(c) where no consideration is payable for the supply of a service, the person to whom the
service is rendered,
and any reference to a person to whom a supply is made shall be construed as a reference to the
recipient of the supply and shall include an agent acting as such on behalf of the recipient in relation
to the goo ds or services or both supplied ;
(94) “registered person” means a person who is registered under section 25 but does not include a
person having a Unique Identity Number ;
(95) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Government under this Act on the
recommendations of the Council ;
(96) “removal” in relation to goods, means —
(a) despatch of the goods for delivery by the supplier thereof or by any other person ac ting on
behalf of such supplier ; or
(b) collection of the goods by the recipient thereo f or by any other person act ing on behalf of
such recipient ;
(97) “return” means any return prescribed or otherwise required to be furnished by or under this
Act or the rules made thereunder ;
(98) “reverse charge” means the liability to pay tax by the re cipient of supply of goods or services
or both instead of the supplier of such goods or services or both under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4)
of section 9, or under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 5 of the Integr ated Goods and Services
Tax Act ;
(99) “Revisional Authority” means an authority appointed or authorised for revision of decision or
order s as referred to in section 108 ;
(100) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to this Act ;
(101) “securities” shall have the same meaning as a ssigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the
Securities Contracts (Reg ulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) ;
(102) “services” means anything other than goods, money and securities but includes activities
relating to the use of money or its conversion by cash or by any other mode, from one form, currency or
denomination, to another form, currency or denomination for which a separate consideration is charged;
[Explanation. — For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the expression, “services”
inclu des facilitating or arran ging transactions in securities ;]
[(102A ) “specified actionable claim” means the actionable claim involved in or by way of, —
(i) betting;
(ii) casinos;
(iii) gambling;
(iv) horse racing;
(v) lottery; or

This Explanation was inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 2( g), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
This clause was inserted by Mah. 1 of 2024, s. 2( b), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(vi) online money gam ing;]
(103) “State” means the State of Maharashtra ;
(104) “State tax” mean s the tax levied under this Act ;
(105) “supplier” in relation to any goods or services or both, shall mean the person supplying the
said goods or services or both and shall include an agent acting as such on behalf of such supplier in
relation to the good s or services or both supplied :
[Provided that, a person who organizes or arranges, directly or indirectly, supply of specified
actionable claims, including a person who ow ns, operates or manages digital or electronic platform for
such supply, shall be deemed to be a supplier of such actionable claims, whether such actionable claims
are supplied by him or through him and whether consideration in money or money’s worth, inclu ding
virtual digital assets, for supply of such actionable claims is paid or conveyed to him or through him or
placed at his disposal in any manner, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such supplier of
specified actionable claims, as if he is the supplier liable to pay the tax in relation to the supply of such
actionable claims];
(106) “tax period” means the period for which the ret urn is required to be furnished ;
(107) “taxable person” means a person who is registered or liable to be registered under section 22
or section 24 ;
(108) “taxable supply” means a supply of goods or services or both which is leviable to tax under
this Act ;
(109) “taxable territory” means the territory to which t he provisions of this Act apply ;
(110) “teleco mmunication service” means service of any description (including electronic mail,
voice mail, data services, audio text services, video text services, radio paging and cellular mobile
telephone services) which is made available to users by means of any tra nsmission or reception of signs,
signals, writing, images and sounds or intelligence of any nature, by wire, radio, visual or other
electromagnetic means ;
(111) “the Central Goods and Services Tax Act” means the Central Goods and Services Tax Ac t,
(1 2 of 2017) ;
(112) “turnover in State” or “turnover in Union territory” means the aggregate value of all taxable
supplies (excluding the value of inward supplies on which tax is payable by a person on reverse charge
basis) and exempt supplies made within a State or Union territory by a taxable person, exports of goods
or services or both and inter -State supplies of goods or services or both made from the State or Union
territory by the said taxable person but excludes central tax, State tax, Union territo ry tax, integrated tax
and cess ;
(113) “usual place of residence” means ––
(a) in case of an individual, the pl ace where he ordinarily resides ;
(b) in other cases, the place where the person is incorporated o r otherwise legally constituted ;
(114) “Union territory” means the territory of, —
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands ;
(b) Lakshadweep ;
[(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and D iu;
(d) Ladakh ;]
(e) Chandigarh ; and
(f) other territory.

This proviso was added by Mah. 1 of 2024, s. 2( c), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.

Explanation. — For the purposes of this Act, each of the territories specified in sub -clauses ( a) to
(f) shall be considered t o be a separate Union territory ;
(115) “Union territory tax” means the Union territory goods and services tax levied under the Union
Territory Goods and Services Tax Ac t;
(116) “Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act” means the Union Territory Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017 (14 of 2017) ;
[(116A ) “unique identification marking” means the unique identification marking referred to in
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 148A and includes a digital stamp, digital mark or any other
similar marking, which is unique, secure and non -removable;]
(117) “valid return” means a return furnished under sub -section ( 1) of section 39 on which
self-assessed tax has been paid in full;
[(117A ) “virtual digital asset” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 47A) of
(118) “voucher” means an instrument where there is an obligation to accept it as consideration or
part c onsideration for a supply of goods or services or both and where the goods or services or both to
be supplied or the identities of their potential suppliers are either indicated on the instrument itself or in
related documentation, including the terms and conditions of use of such instrument;
(119) “works contract” means a contract for building, construction, fabrication, completion,
erection, installation, fitting out, improvement, modification, repair, maintenance, renovation, alteration
or commissioning of any immovable property wherein transfer of property in goods (whether as goods
or in some other form) is involved in the execution of such contract;
(120) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Integrated Goods
and Services Tax Act, the Central Goods and Serv ices Tax Act, the Union Territory Goods and Services
Tax Act and the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act shall have the same meanings as
assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
ADMINISTRATION
3. Officers under this Act. –– The Government shall, by notification, appoint the following classes
of officers for the purposes of this Act, namely: ––
(a) Commissioner of State tax,
(b) Special Commissioners of State tax,
(c) Additional Commissioners of State tax,
(d) Joint Commissioners of Stat e tax,
(e) Deputy Commissioners of State tax,
[(f) Assistant Commissioners of State tax,
(f-1) State Tax Officers, and]
(g) any other class of officers as it may deem fit:
Provided that, the officers appointed under the Maharashtra Value Added Tax A ct, 2002 (Mah. IX
of 2005), shall be deemed to be the officers appointed under the provisions of this Act.
4. Appointment of officers. –– (1) The Government may, in addition to the officers as may be
notified under section 3, appoint such persons as it may think fit to be the officers under this Act.

Clause ( 117A ) was inserted by Mah. 1 of 2024, s. 2( a), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
Clause ( f) was substituted by Mah. 26 of 2018, s. 15, w.e.f . 1st April 2018.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(2) The Commissioner shall have jurisdiction over the whole of the State, the Special Commiss ioner
and an Additional Commissioner in respect of all or any of the functions assigned to them, shall have
jurisdiction over the whole of the State or where the State Government so directs, over any local area
thereof, and all other officers shall, subjec t to such conditions as may be specified, have jurisdiction over
the whole of the State or over such local areas as the Commissioner may, by order, specify.
5. Powers of officers. –– (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as the Commissioner may
impose, an officer of State tax may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed
on him under this Act.
(2) An officer of State tax may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed
under this Act on any other offic er of State tax who is subordinate to him.
(3) The Commissioner may, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in this
behalf by him, delegate his powers to any other officer who is subordinate to him.
(4) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in this section, an Appellate Authority shall not exercise
the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on any other officer of State tax.
6. Authorisation of officers of central tax as proper officer in certain
circumstances. –– (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act are authorised to be the proper officers for the purposes of this Act,
subject to such conditions as the Government shall, on the recommend ations of the Council, by
notification, specify.
(2) Subject to the conditions specified in the notification issued under sub -section ( 1),—
(a) where any proper officer issues an order under this Act, he shall also issue an order under
the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, as authorised by the said Act under intimation to the
jurisdictional officer of central tax;
(b) where a proper officer u nder the Central Goods and Services Tax Act has initiated any
proceedings on a subject matter, no proceedings shall be initiated by the proper officer under this
Act on the same subject matter.
(3) Any proceedings for rectification, appeal and revision, w herever applicable, of any order passed
by an officer appointed under this Act, shall not lie before an officer appointed under the Central Goods
and Services Tax Act.
CHAPTER III
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAX
7. Scope of supply. –– (1) For the purposes of this Act, the expression “supply” includes ––
(a) all forms of supply of goods or services or both such as sale, transfer, barter, exchange,
license, rental, lease or disposal made or agreed to be made for a consideration by a person in the
course or furtherance of business;
[(aa) the activities or transactions, by a person, other than an individual, to its members or
constituents or vice-versa , for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration.
Explanation. — For the purpos es of this clause, it is hereby clarified that, notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force or any judgment, decree or order of any Court,
tribunal or authority, the person and its members or constituents shall be deemed to be two separate
persons and the supply of activities or transactions inter se shall be deemed to take place from one such
person to another;]

This clause and Explanation was inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted w.e.f . 1st July 2017
by Mah. 13 of 2021, s. 3.

(b) import of services for a consideration whether or not in the cou rse or furtherance of
business [and];
(c) the activities specified in Schedule I, made or agreed to be made without a consideration;
[* * *]
[* * *]
[(1A) Where certain activities or transactions constitute a supply in accordance with the provisions
of sub -section ( 1), they shall be treated either as supply of goods or supply of services as referred to in
Schedule II.]
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),––
(a) activities or transactions specified in Schedule III; or
(b) such activities or tra nsactions undertaken by the Central Government, a State Government
or any local authority in which they are engaged as public authorities, as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council,
shall be treated neither as a supply of goods nor a supply of services.
(3) Subject to the provisions of [sub-sections ( 1), (1A) and ( 2)], the Government may, on the
recommendations of the Council, specify, by notification, the transactions that are to be treated as —
(a) a supply of goods and not as a supply of services; or
(b) a supply of services and not as a supply of goods.
8. Tax liability on composite and mixed supplies. — The tax liability on a composite or a mixed
supply shall be determined in the following manne r, namely: —
(a) a composite supply comprising two or more supplies, one of which is a principal supply,
shall be treated as a supply of such principal supply; and
(b) a mixed supply comprising two or more supplies shall be treated as a supply of that
particular supply which attracts the highest rate of tax.
9. Levy and collection. — (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), there shall be levied a
tax called the Maharashtra goods and services tax on all intra -State supplies of goods or services or both,
except on the supply of alcoholic liquor for human consumption [and un -denatured extra neutral alcohol
or rectified spirit used for manufacture of alcoholic liquor, for human consumption] , on the value
determined under section 15 and at such rates, not exceeding twenty per cent., as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council and collected in such manner as may be prescribed
and shall be paid by the taxable person.
(2) The State tax on the supply of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly
known as petrol), natural gas and aviation turbine fuel, shall be levied with effect from such date as may
be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council.
(3) The Government may, on the recommendations of the C ouncil, by notification, specify
categories of supply of goods or services or both, the tax on which shall be paid on reverse charge basis
by the recipient of such goods or services or both and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such
recipient a s if he is the person liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of such goods or services
or both.

This word was inserted and always be deemed to have been inserted w.e.f . 1st July 2017 by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 3( a)(i).
The word “and” was deleted and always be deemed to have been deleted w.e.f . 1st July 2017 by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 3( a)(ii).
Clause ( d) was deleted and always be deemed to have been deleted w.e.f . 1st July 2017 by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 3( a)(iii).
This sub -section was inserted and always be deemed to have been inserted w.e.f . 1st July 2017 by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 3( b).
These words, brackets and figures were substituted and always be deemed to have been substituted for the words, brackets
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
[(4) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify a class
of registered persons who shall, in respect of supply of specified categories of goods or services or both
received from an unregistered supplier, pay the tax on reverse charge basis as the recipient of such supply
of goods or services or both, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such rec ipient as if he is the
person liable for paying the tax in relation to such supply of goods or services or both.]
(5) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify
categories of services the tax on intra -State supplies of which shall be paid by the electronic commerce
operator if such services are supplied through it, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such
electronic commerce operator as if he is the supplier liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of
such services:
Provided that where an electronic commerce operator does not have a physical presence in the
taxable territory, any person representing such electronic commerce operator for any purpose in the
taxable terri tory shall be liable to pay tax :
Provided further that where an electronic commerce operator does not have a physical presence in
the taxable territory and also he does not have a representative in the said territory, such electronic
commerce operator shall appoint a person in t he taxable territory for the purpose of paying tax and such
person shall be liable to pay tax.
10. Composition levy. — (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act but
subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 9, a registered person, whose aggregate
turnover in the preceding financial year did not exceed fif ty lakh rupees may opt to pay, [in lieu of the
tax payable by him, under sub -section ( 1) of section 9, an amount of tax calculated at such rate] as may
be prescribed, but not exceeding, —
(a) one per cent. of the turnover in State in case of a manufacturer,
(b) two and a half per cent. of the turnover in State in case of persons engaged in making
supplies referred to in clause ( b) of paragraph 6 of Schedule II, and
(c) half per cent. of the turnover in State in case of other suppliers, subject to such conditions
and restrictions as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Government may, by notification, increase the said limit of fifty lakh rupees to
such high er amount, not exceeding [one crore and fifty lakh rupees], as may be recommended by the
Council:
[Provided further that, a person who opts to pay tax under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c)
may supply services (other than those referred to in claus e (b) of paragraph 6 of Schedule II), of value
not exceeding ten per cent. of turnover in the State in the preceding financial year or five lakh rupees,
whichever is higher.]
[Explanation. — For the purposes of second proviso, the value of exempt supply o f services
provided by way of extending deposits, loans or advances in so far as the consideration is represented by
way of interest or discount shall not be taken into account for determining the value of turnover in the
State.]
(2) The registered person shall be eligible to opt under sub -section ( 1), if—
[(a) save as provided in sub -section ( 1), he is not engaged in the supply of services;]
(b) he is not engaged in making any supply of goods [or services] which are not leviable to
tax under this Act;

These words, brackets and figures were substituted for the words “in lieu of the tax payable by him, and amount calculated
at such rate” by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 5( a)(i), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
These words were substituted for the words “one crore rupe es” by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 5( a)(ii), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
This proviso was inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 5( a)(iii), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
Explanation was inserted by Mah. 31 of 2019, s. 3( a), w.e.f . 1st January 2020.
Clause ( a) was subs tituted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 5( b), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
These words were inserted by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 3( a), w.e.f . 22nd June 2017 .

(c) he is not engaged in making any inter -State outward supplies of goods [or services];
(d) he is not engaged in making any supply of [* * * [*] services ] through an electronic
commerce operator who is required to collect tax at source under section 52; [* * *]
(e) he is not a manufacturer of such goods as may be notified by the Government on the
recommendations of the [Council; and]
[(f) he is neith er a casual taxable person nor a non -resident taxable person:]
Provided that where more than one registered person are having the same Permanent Account
Number (issued under the Income -tax Act , 1961 (43 of 1961) ), the registered person shall not be eligib le
to opt for the scheme under sub -section ( 1) unless all such registered persons opt to pay tax under that
sub-section.
[(2A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, but subject to the provisions
of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of se ction 9, a registered person, not eligible to opt to pay tax under
sub-section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2), whose aggregate turnover in the preceding financial year did not
exceed fifty lakh rupees, may opt to pay, in lieu of the tax payable by him under sub -section ( 1) of section
9, an amount of tax calculated at such rate as may be prescribed, but not exceeding three per cent. of the
turnover in State, if he is not, —
(a) engaged in making any supply of goods or services which are not leviable to tax under
this Act;
(b) engaged in making any inter -State outward supplies of goods or services;
(c) engaged in making any supply of [* * *] services through an electronic com merce
operator who is required to collect tax at source under section 52;
(d) a manufacturer of such goods or supplier of such services as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council; and
(e) a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person:
Provided that, where more than one registered person are having the same Permanent Account
Number issued under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the registered person shall not be eligible
to opt for the scheme under this sub -section unless all such registered persons opt to pay tax under this
sub-section.]
(3) The option availed of by a registered person under sub -section ( 1) [or sub -section ( 2A), as the
case may be,] shall lapse with effect from the day on which his aggrega te turnover during a financial
year exceeds the limit specified under sub -section ( 1) [or sub -section ( 2A), as the case may be.]
(4) A taxable person to whom the provisions of sub -section ( 1) [or, as the case may be,
sub-section ( 2A)] apply shall not c ollect any tax from the recipient on supplies made by him nor shall he
be entitled to any credit of input tax.
(5) If the proper officer has reasons to believe that a taxable person has paid tax under sub -section
(1) [or sub -section ( 2A), as the case may be,] despite not being eligible, such person shall, in addition
to any tax that may be payable by him under any other provisions of this Act, be liable to a penalty and

These words were inserted by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 3( b), w.e.f . 22nd June 2017 .
These words were substi tuted for the word “Council:” by Mah. 31 of 2019, s. 3( b)(ii), w.e.f . 1st January 2020.
This clause was inserted by Mah. 31 of 2019, s. 3( b)(iii), w.e.f . 1st January 2020.
Sub-section ( 2A) was inserted by Mah. 31 of 2019, s. 3( c), w.e.f . 1st January 2020.
These words, brackets, figure and letter were inserted by Mah. 31 of 2019, s. 3( d), w.e.f . 1st January 2020.
These words, brackets, figure and l etter were inserted by Mah. 31 of 2019, s. 3( d), w.e.f . 1st January 2020.
These words, brackets, figure and letter were inserted by Mah. 31 of 2019, s. 3( e), w.e.f . 1st January 2020.
These words, brackets, figure and letter were inserted by Mah. 31 o f 2019, s. 3( f), w.e.f . 1st January 2020.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
the provisions of section 73 or section 74 shall [or section 74A] , mutatis mutandis , apply for
determination of tax and penalty.
[Explanation 1 .— For the purposes of computing aggregate turnover of a person for determining
his eligibility to pay tax under this section, the expression “aggregate turnover” shall include the value
of suppli es made by such person from the 1st day of April of financial year upto the date when he become s
liable for registration under this Act. But shall not include the value of exempt supply of services
provided by way of extending deposits, loans or advances in so far as the consideration is represented by
way of interest or discount.
Explanation 2. — For the purposes of determining the tax payable by a person under this section,
the expression “turnover in State” shall not include the value of following supplies, namely: —
(i) supplies from the first day of April of a financial year upto the date when su ch person
becomes liable for registration under this Act; and
(ii) exempt supply of services provided by way of extending deposits, loans or advances in so
far as the consideration is represented by way of interest or discount.]
11. Power to grant exemption from tax .— (1) Where the Government is satisfied that it is
necessary in the public interest so to do, it may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification,
exempt generally, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be spe cified therein, goods or
services or both of any specified description from the whole or any part of the tax leviable thereon with
effect from such date as may be specified in such notification.
(2) Where the Government is satisfied that it is necessary i n the public interest so to do, it may, on
the recommendations of the Council, by special order in each case, under circumstances of an exceptional
nature to be stated in such order, exempt from payment of tax any goods or services or both on which
tax is leviable.
(3) The Government may, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do for the purpose of
clarifying the scope or applicability of any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) or order issued under
sub-section ( 2), insert an explanation in suc h notification or order, as the case may be, by notification at
any time within one year of issue of the notification under sub -section ( 1) or order under sub -section ( 2),
and every such explanation shall have effect as if it had always been the part of th e first such notification
or order, as the case may be.
(4) Any notification issued by the Central Government, on the recommendations of the Council,
under sub -section ( 1) of section 11 or order issued under sub -section ( 2) of the said section of the Cent ral
Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be a notification or, as the case may be, an order issued
under this Act.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this section, where an exemption in respect of any goods or
services or both from the whole or p art of the tax leviable thereon has been granted absolutely, the
registered person supplying such goods or services or both shall not collect the tax, in excess of the
effective rate, on such supply of goods or services or both.
[11A. Power not to recov er Goods and Services Tax not levied or short -levied as a result of
general practice. — Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the Government is satisfied
that,—
(a) a practice was, or is, generally prevalent regarding levy of State tax (includ ing non -levy
thereof) on any supply of goods or services or both; and
(b) such supplies were, or are, liable to, —
(i) State tax, in cases where according to the said practice, State tax was not, or is not
being, levied, or

These words, figure and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 4, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
Explanation was inserted by Mah. 31 of 2019, s. 3( g), w.e.f . 1st January 2020.
This section was inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 5, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

(ii) a higher amount of State tax than what was, or is being, levied, in accordance with
the said practice,
the Government may, on the recommendation of the Council, by notification in the Official Gazette ,
direct that the whole of the State tax payable on such supplies, or, as the ca se may be, the State tax in
excess of that payable on such supplies, but for the said practice, shall not be required to be paid in
respect of the supplies on which the State tax was not, or is not being levied, or was, or is being,
short -levied, in accor dance with the said practice.]
CHAPTER IV
TIME AND VALUE OF SUPPLY
12. Time of supply of good. — (1) The liability to pay tax on goods shall arise at the time of
supply, as determined in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) The time of supply of goods shall be the earlier of the following dates, namely: —
(a) the date of issue of invoice by the supplier or the last date on which he is required, under
[* * *] section 31, to issue the invoice with respect to the supply; o r
(b) the date on which the supplier receives the payment with respect to the supply:
Provided that where the supplier of taxable goods receives an amount up to one thousand rupees in
excess of the amount indicated in the tax invoice, the time of supply to the extent of such excess amount
shall, at the option of the said supplier, be the date of issue of invoice in respect of such excess amount.
Explanation 1. –– For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b), “supply” shall be deemed to have been
made to the ext ent it is covered by the invoice or, as the case may be, the payment.
Explanation 2. –– For the purposes of clause ( b), “the date on which the supplier receives the
payment” shall be the date on which the payment is entered in his books of account or the d ate on which
the payment is credited to his bank account, whichever is earlier.
(3) In case of supplies in respect of which tax is paid or liable to be paid on reverse charge basis,
the time of supply shall be the earliest of the following dates, namely: —
(a) the date of the receipt of goods; or
(b) the date of payment as entered in the books of account of the recipient or the date on which
the payment is debited in his bank account, whichever is earlier; or
(c) the date immediately following thirty day s from the date of issue of invoice or any other
document, by whatever name called, in lieu thereof by the supplier:
Provided that where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under clause ( a) or clause ( b)
or clause ( c), the time of supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the recipient of
supply.
[* * *]
(5) Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under the provisions of sub -section ( 2)
or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), the time of supply shall ––
(a) in a case where a periodical return has to be filed, be the date on which such return is to
be filed; or
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid.
(6) The time of supply to the extent it relates to an additi on in the value of supply by way of interest,
late fee or penalty for delayed payment of any consideration shall be the date on which the supplier
receives such addition in value.

The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
13. Time of supply of services. — (1) The liability to pay tax on services shall arise at the time of
supply, as determined in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) The time of supply of services shall be the earliest of the following dates, namely: —
(a) the date of issue of invoice by the supplier, if the invoice is issued within the period
prescribed under [* * *] section 31 or the date of receipt of payment, whichever is earlier; or
(b) the date of provision of service, if the invoice is not issued within the period prescribed
under [* * *] section 31 or the date of receipt of payment, whichever is earlier; or
(c) the date on which the recipient shows the receipt of services in his books of account, in a
case where the provisions of clause ( a) or clause ( b) do not apply:
Provided that where the supplier of taxable service receives an amount upto one thousand rupees
in excess of the amount indicated in the tax invoice, the time of supply to the extent of such excess
amount shall, at the option of the said supplier, be the date of issue of invoice relating to such excess
amount.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b)—
(i) the supply shall be deemed to have been made to the extent it is covered by the invoice or,
as the case may be, the payment;
(ii) “the date of receipt of payment” shall b e the date on which the payment is entered in the
books of account of the supplier or the date on which the payment is credited to his bank account,
whichever is earlier.
(3) In case of supplies in respect of which tax is paid or liable to be paid on rever se charge basis,
the time of supply shall be the earlier of the following dates, namely: ––
(a) the date of payment as entered in the books of account of the recipient or the date on which
the payment is debited in his bank account, whichever is earlier; o r
(b) the date immediately following sixty days from the date of issue of invoice or any other
document, by whatever name called, in lieu thereof [by the supplier , in care where invoice is
required to be issued by the supplier; or]
[(c) the date of issue of invoice by the recipient, in cases where invoice is to be issued by the
recipient:]
Provided that where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under clause ( a) or clause ( b)
[or clause ( c)], the time of supply shall be the date of ent ry in the books of account of the recipient of
supply:
Provided further that in case of supply by associated enterprises, where the supplier of service is
located outside India, the time of supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the recipient
of supply or the date of payment, whichever is earlier.
[* * *]
(5) Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under the provisions of sub -section ( 2)
or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), the time of supply shall ––
(a) in a ca se where a periodical return has to be filed, be the date on which such return is to
be filed; or
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid.

These words were substituted for the words “by the supplier” by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 6( 1), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
This clause was inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 6( 2), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
These words were inserted by Mah. 8 o f 2025, s. 6( 3), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

(6) The time of supply to the extent it relates to an addition in the value of supply by way of interest,
late fee or penalty for delayed payment of any consideration shall be the date on which the supplier
receives such addition in value.
14. Change in rate of tax in respect of supply of goods or services. — Notwithstanding anything
contained in section 12 or section 13, the time of supply, where there is a change in the rate of tax in
respect of goods or services or both, shall be determined in the following manner, namely: ––
(a) in case the goods or servic es or both have been supplied before the change in rate of tax, ––
(i) where the invoice for the same has been issued and the payment is also received after the
change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of payment or the date o f issue
of invoice, whichever is earlier; or
(ii) where the invoice has been issued prior to the change in rate of tax but payment is received
after the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of issue of
invoice; or
(iii) where the payment has been received before the change in rate of tax, but the invoice for
the same is issued after the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of
payment;
(b) in case the goods or services or both have been supplied af ter the change in rate of tax, ––
(i) where the payment is received after the change in rate of tax but the invoice has been issued
prior to the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of
payment; or
(ii) where the invoice has been issued and payment is received before the change in rate of
tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of payment or date of issue of invoice, whichever
is earlier; or
(iii) where the invoice has been issued after the change in rate of tax but the payment is
received before the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of issue of
invoice:
Provided that the date of receipt of payment shall be the date of credit in the bank account if
such credit in the bank account is after four working days from the date of change in the rate
of tax.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this section, “the date of receipt of payment” shall be the
date on which the payment is entered in the books of account of the supplier or the date on which
the payment is credited to his bank account, whichever is earlier.
15. Valu e of taxable supply. — (1) The value of a supply of goods or services or both shall be the
transaction value, which is the price actually paid or payable for the said supply of goods or services or
both where the supplier and the recipient of the supply are not related and the price is the sole
consideration for the supply.
(2) The value of supply shall include –––
(a) any taxes, duties, cesses, fees and charges levied under any law for the time being in force
other than this Act, the Central Goods and Serv ices Tax Act and the Goods and Services Tax
(Compensation to States) Act, if charged separately by the supplier;
(b) any amount that the supplier is liable to pay in relation to such supply but which has been
incurred by the recipient of the supply and no t included in the price actually paid or payable for the
goods or services or both;
(c) incidental expenses, including commission and packing, charged by the supplier to the
recipient of a supply and any amount charged for anything done by the supplier in respect of the
supply of goods or services or both at the time of, or before delivery of goods or supply of services;
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(d) interest or late fee or penalty for delayed payment of any consideration for any
supply; and
(e) subsidies directly linked to the price excluding subsidies provided by the Central
Government and State Governments.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this sub -section, the amount of subsidy shall be included in the
value of supply of the supplier who receives the subsidy.
(3) The valu e of the supply shall not include any discount which is given —
(a) before or at the time of the supply if such discount has been duly recorded in the invoice
issued in respect of such supply ; and
(b) after the supply has been effected, if —
(i) such disc ount is established in terms of an agreement entered into at or before the
time of such supply and specifica lly linked to relevant invoices ; and
(ii) input tax credit as is attributable to the discount on the basis of document issued by
the supplier has b een reversed by the recipient of the supply.
(4) Where the value of the supply of goods or services or both cannot be determined under
sub-section ( 1), the same shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contai ned in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 4), the value of such
supplies as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be
determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation. — For the purposes of this Act, —
(a) persons shall be deemed to be “related persons” if—
(i) such persons are officers or direct ors of one another’s businesses ;
(ii) such persons are legally recognised partners in business ;
(iii) such pe rsons are employer and employee ;
(iv) any person directly or indirectly owns, controls or holds twenty -five per cent. or
more of the outstanding voting stock or shares of both of them ;
(v) one of them directly o r indirectly controls the other ;
(vi) both of them are directly or indirect ly co ntrolled by a third person ;
(vii) together they directly or indirectly control a third person ; or
(viii) they are members of the same family ;
(b) the term “pers on” also includes legal persons ;
(c) persons who are associated in the business of one anoth er in that one is the sole agent or
sole distributor or sole concessionaire, howsoever described, of the other, shall be deemed to be
related.
CHAPTER V
INPUT TAX CREDIT
16. Eligibility and conditions for taking input tax credit. — (1) Every registered per son shall,
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed and in the manner specified in section
49, be entitled to take credit of input tax charged on any supply of goods or services or both to him which
are used or intended to be used i n the course or furtherance of his business and the said amount shall be
credited to the electronic credit ledger of such person.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no registered person shall be entitled to the
credit of any input tax in respect of any supply of goods or services or both to him unless, ––

(a) he is in possession of a tax invoice or debit note issued by a supplier registered under this
Act, or such other tax paying documents as may be prescribed ;
[(aa) the details of the invoice or debit note referred to in clause ( a) has been furnished by
the supplier in the statement of outward supplies and such details have been communicated to the
recipient of such invoice or debit note in the ma nner specified under section 37 ;]
(b) he has received the goods or services or both.
[Explanation. — For the purposes of this clause, it shall be deemed that the registered person has
received the goods or, as the case may be, services —
(i) where the goods are delivered by the supplier to a recipient or any other person on the
direction of such registered person, whether acting as an agent otherwise, before or during
movement of goods, either by way of transfer of documents of title to goods or otherwise ;
(ii) where the services are provi ded by the supplier to any person on the direction of and on
account of such registered person ;]
[(ba) the details of input tax credit in respect of the said supply communicated to such
registered person under section 38 has not been restricted;]
(c) subject to the provisions of [section 41 [* * *]], the tax charged in respect of such supply
has been actually paid to the Government, either in cash or through utilisation of input tax credit
admissibl e in respect of the said supply ; and
(d) he has furnis hed the return under section 39 :
Provided that where the goods against an invoice are received in lots or instalments, the registered
person shall be entitled to take credit upon receip t of the last lot or instalment :
Provided further that where a recipient fails to pay to the supplier of goods or services or both, other
than the supplies on which tax is payable on reverse charge basis, the amount towards the value of supply
along with tax payable thereon within a period of one hundred and eighty da ys from the date of issue of
invoice by the supplier, an amount equal to the input tax credit availed by the recipient shall be [paid by
him along with interest payable under section 50] , in s uch manner as may be prescribed :
Provided also that the recipi ent shall be entitled to avail of the credit of input tax on payment made
by him [to the supplier] of the amount towards the value of supply of goods or services or both along
with tax payable thereon.
(3) Where the registered person has claimed depreciat ion on the tax component of the cost of capital
goods and plant and machinery under the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the input
tax credit on the said tax component shall not be allowed.
(4) A registered person shall not be entitled to take input tax credit in respect of any invoice or debit
note for supply of goods or services or both after the [thirtieth day of November] following the end of
financial year to which such invoice or [* * *] debit note pertains or furnishing of the relevant annu al
return, whichever is earlier :
[Provided that the registered person shall be entitled to take input tax credit after the due date of
furnishing of the return under section 39 for the month of September, 2018 till the due date of furnishing

This clause was inserted by Mah. 13 of 2021, s. 3, w.e.f . 1st January 2022.
This Explanation was substituted for the existing Explanation by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 8( a), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
This clause was inserted by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 2( a)(i), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
These words, figures and letter were substituted for the word and f igures “section 41” by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 8( b), w.e.f .
1st February 2019.
These words and figures were substituted for the words “a dded to his output tax liability, along with interest thereon” by
Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 3( i), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
These words were inserted by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 3( ii), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
These words were substituted for the words and figur es “due date of furnishing of the return under section 39 for the month
of September” by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 2( b), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
This proviso was inserted by the Maharashtra Goods and Services Tax (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 2018, s. 2.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
of the return under the said section for the month of March, 2019 in respect of any invoice or invoice
relating to such debit note for supply of goods or services or both made during the financial year
-18, the details of which have been uploaded by t he supplier under sub -section ( 1) of section 37 till
the due date for furnishing the details under sub -section ( 1) of said section for the month of March, 2019.]
[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 4), in respect of an invoice or debit note
for supply of goods or services or both pertaining to the Financial Years 2017 -18, 2018 -19, 2019 -20 and
-21, the registered person shall be entitled to take input tax credit in any return under section 39
which is filed up to the thirtieth day of November 2021.
(6) Where registration of a registered person is cancelled under section 29 and subsequently the
cancellation of registration is revoked by any order, either under section 30 or pursuant to any order
made by the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or court and where availment of input tax
credit in respect of an invoice or debit note was not restricted under sub -section ( 4) on the date of order
of cancellation of registration, the said person shall be entitled to take the input ta x credit in respect of
such invoice or debit note for supply of goods or services or both, in a return under section 39, —
(i) filed up to thirtieth day of November following the financial year to which such invoice or
debit note pertains or furnishing of the relevant annual return, whichever is earlier; or
(ii) for the period from the date of cancellation of registration or th e effective date of
cancellation of registration, as the case may be, till the date of order of revocation of cancellation
of registration, where such return is filed within thirty days from the date of order of revocation of
cancellation of registration, whichever is later .]
17. Apportionment of credit and blocked credits. — (1) Where the goods or services or both are
used by the registered person partly for the purpose of any business and partly for other purposes, the
amount of credit shall be restricted to so much of the input tax as is attributable to the purposes of his
business.
(2) Where the goods or services or both are used by the registered person partly for effecting taxable
supplies including zero -rated supplies under this Act or under the Inte grated Goods and Services Tax
Act and partly for effecting exempt supplies under the said Acts, the amount of credit shall be restricted
to so much of the input tax as is attributable to the said taxable supplies including zero -rated supplies.
(3) The val ue of exempt supply under sub -section ( 2) shall be such as may be prescribed, and shall
include supplies on which the recipient is liable to pay tax on reverse charge basis, transactions in
securities, sale of land and, subject to clause ( b) of paragraph 5 of Schedule II, sale of building.
[Explanation .— For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “value of exempt supply”
shall not include the value of activities or transactions specified in Schedule III, [except, —
(i) the value of activities or transactions specified in paragraph 5 of the said Schedule ; and
(ii) the value of such activities or transactions as may be prescribed in respect of clause ( a) of
paragraph 8 of the said Schedule .]]
(4) A banking company or a financial institution including a non -banking financial company,
engaged in supplying services by way of accepting deposits, extending loans or advances shall have the
option to either comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 2), or avail of, every mon th, an amount equal
to fifty per cent. of the eligible input tax credit on inputs, capital goods and input services in that month
and the rest shall lapse :
Provided that the option once exercised shall not be withdrawn during the remai ning part of the
financial year :
Provided further that the restriction of fifty per cent. shall not apply to the tax paid on supplies
made by one registered person to another registered person having the same Permanent Account Number.

These sub -sections were added and shall be deemed to have been added with effect from the 1st July 2017 by
Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 7.
This Explana tion was inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 9( a), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
These words and figures were substituted for the words and figure “except those specified in paragraph 5 of the said
Schedule” by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 4( a), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained i n sub -section ( 1) of section 16 and sub -section ( 1) of
[(a) motor vehicles for transportation of persons having approved seating capacity of not
more than thirteen persons (including the driver), except when they are used for making the
following taxable supplie s, namely :—
(A) furthe r supply of such motor vehicles ; or
(B) transportation of passengers ; or
(C) imparting training on driving such motor vehicles ;
(aa) vessels and aircraft except when they are used —
(i) for making the fol lowing taxable supplies, namely :—
(A) further sup ply of such vessels or aircraft ; or
(B) transportation of passengers ; or
(C) imparting trai ning on navigating such vessels ; or
(D) imparting t raining on flying such aircraft ;
(ii) for transportation of goods ;
(ab) services of general insurance, servicing, repair and maintenance in so far as they relate
to motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( aa):
Provided that, the input tax credit in respect of such services shall be available, —
(i) where the motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( aa)
are used for the purposes specified therein;
(ii) where received by a taxable person engaged —
(I) in the manufacture of such moto r vehicles, vessels or aircraft ; or
(II) in the supply of general insurance services in respect of such motor vehicles,
vessels or aircraft insured by him ;
(b) the following supply of goods or services o r both —
(i) food and beverages, outdoor catering, beauty treatment, health services, cosmetic and
plastic surgery, leasing, renting or hiring of motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft referred to in
clause ( a) or clause ( aa) except when used for the purposes specified therein, life insurance
and health in surance :
Provided that, the input tax credit in respect of such goods or services or both shall be
available where an inward supply of such goods or services or both is used by a registered
person for making an outward taxable supply of the same category of goods or services or
both or as an element of a ta xable composite or mixed supply ;
(ii) membership of a club, health and fitness centre ; and
(iii) travel benefits extended to employees on vacation such as leave or home travel
concession :
Provided that, the input tax credit in respect of such goods or services or both shall be
available, where it is obligatory for an employer to provide the same to its employees under
any law for the time being in force; ]
(c) works contract services when supplied for construction of an immovable property (other
than plant and machinery) except where it is an input service for further s upply of works contract
service ;

These clauses were substituted for clauses ( a) and ( b) by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 9( b), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(d) goods or services or both received by a taxable person for construction of an immovable
property (other than [plant and machinery ]) on his own account including when such goods or
services or both are used intercourse or furtherance of business.
[Explanation 1].–– For the purposes of clauses ( c) and ( d), the expression “construction”
includes
re-construction, renovation, additions or alterations or repairs, to the extent of capitalisation, to the
said immovable property ;
[Explanation 2 .–– For th e purposes of clause ( d), it is hereby clarified that notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal, or other
authority, any reference to ‘plant or machinery’ shall be construed and shall always be deemed to
have been construed as a reference to ‘plant and machinery’;]
(e) goods or services or both on which tax has been paid under section 10;
(f) goods or services or both received by a non -resident taxable person except on goods
imported by him ;
[(fa) goods or services or both received by a taxable person, which are used or intended to
be used for activities relating to his obligations under corporate social responsibility referred to in
(g) goods or services or bot h used for personal consumption ;
(h) goods lost, stolen, destroyed, written off or disposed of by way of gift or free
samples ; and
(i) any tax paid in ac cordance with the provisions of [section 74 in respect of any period upto
Financial Year 2023 -24].
(6) The Government may prescribe the manner in which the credit referred to in
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) may be attributed.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this Chapter and Chapter VI, the expression “plant and
machinery” means apparatus, equipment, and machinery fixed to earth by foundation or structural
support that are used for making outward supply of goods or services or both and includes such
foundation and structural supports but excludes —
(i) land, buildin g or any other civil structures ;
(ii) telecommunication towers ; and
(iii) pipelines laid outside the factory premises.
18. Availability of credit in special circumstances. –– (1) Subject to such conditions and
restrictions as may be prescribed —
(a) a person who has applied for registration under this Act within thirty days from the date
on which he becomes liable to registration and has been granted such registration shall be entitled
to take credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock a nd inputs contained in semi -finished
or finished goods held in stock on the day immediately preceding the date from which he becomes
liable to pay tax under the provisions of this Act ;

The words “ plant or machinery ” were substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st July
by Mah. 39 of 2025, s. 5( i).
Existing “ Explanation ” was renumbered as “ Explanation 1” by Mah. 39 of 2025, s. 5( ii), w.e.f . 1st October 2025.
Existing Explanation was renumbered as “ Explanation 1” and after “ Explanation 1” as so renumbered this “ Explanation ”
was added by Mah. 39 of 2025, s. 5( ii), w.e.f . 1st October 2025.
This clause was inserted by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 4( b), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
These words and figures were substituted for the words and figures “section 74, 129 and 130” by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 8,
w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

(b) a person who takes registration under sub -section ( 3) of section 2 5 shall be entitled to take
credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished
goods held in stock on the day immediately preceding th e date of grant of registration ;
(c) where any registered person ce ases to pay tax under section 10, he shall be entitled to take
credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock, inputs contained in semi -finished or finished
goods held in stock and on capital goods on the day immediately preceding the date from whi ch he
becomes li able to pay tax under section 9 :
Provided that the credit on capital goods shall be reduced by such percent age points as may
be prescribed ;
(d) where an exempt supply of goods or services or both by a registered person becomes a
taxable s upply, such person shall be entitled to take credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in
stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock relatable to such exempt
supply and on capital goods exclusively used for such exempt supply on the day immediately
preceding the date from wh ich such supply becomes taxable :
Provided that the credit on capital goods shall be reduced by such percentage points as may
be prescribed.
(2) A registered person shall not be entitled to take inpu t tax credit under sub -section ( 1) in respect
of any supply of goods or services or both to him after the expiry of one year from the date of issue of
tax invoice relating to such supply.
(3) Where there is a change in the constitution of a registered per son on account of sale, merger,
demerger, amalgamation, lease or transfer of the business with the specific provisions for transfer of
liabilities, the said registered person shall be allowed to transfer the input tax credit which remains
unutilised in his electronic credit ledger to such sold, merged, demerged, amalgamated, leased or
transferred business in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) Where any registered person who has availed of input tax credit opts to pay tax under section
or, where the go ods or services or both supplied by him become wholly exempt, he shall pay an
amount, by way of debit in the electronic credit ledger or electronic cash ledger, equivalent to the credit
of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained i n semi -finished or finished goods
held in stock and on capital goods, reduced by such percentage points as may be prescribed, on the day
immediately preceding the date of exercising of such option or, as the case may be, the date of such
exemption :
Provid ed that after payment of such amount, the balance of input tax credit, if any, lying in his
electronic credit ledger shall lapse.
(5) The amount of credit under sub -section ( 1) and the amount payable under sub -section ( 4) shall
be calculated in such manne r as may be prescribed.
(6) In case of supply of capital goods or plant and machinery, on which input tax credit has been
taken, the registered person shall pay an amount equal to the input tax credit taken on the said capital
goods or plant and machinery reduced by such percentage points as may be prescribed or the tax on the
transaction value of such capital goods or plant and machinery determined under section 15, whichever
is higher :
Provided that where refractory bricks, moulds and dies, jigs and fix tures are supplied as scrap, the
taxable person may pay tax on the transaction value of such goods determined under section 15.
19. Taking input tax credit in respect of inputs and capital goods sent for job
work.–– (1) The principal shall, subject to suc h conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be
allowed input tax credit on inputs sent to a job worker for job work.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 16, the principal
shall be entitled to take credit of input tax on inputs even if the inputs are directly sent to a jobworker for
jobwork without being first brought to his place of business.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(3) Where the inputs sent for jobwork are not rece ived back by the principal after completion of
jobwork or otherwise or are not supplied from the place of business of the jobworker in accordance with
clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 143 within one year of being sent out, it shall be
deemed that such inputs had been supplied by the principal to the jobworker on the day when the said
inputs were sent out:
Provided that where the inputs are sent directly to a jobworker, the period of one year shall be
counted from the date of receipt o f inputs by the jobworker.
(4) The principal shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be allowed
input tax credit on capital goods sent to a jobworker for jobwork.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( b) of su b-section ( 2) of section 16, the principal
shall be entitled to take credit of input tax on capital goods even if the capital goods are directly sent to
a jobworker for jobwork without being first brought to his place of business.
(6) Where the capital go ods sent for jobwork are not received back by the principal within a period
of three years of being sent out, it shall be deemed that such capital goods had been supplied by the
principal to the jobworker on the day when the s aid capital goods were sent ou t:
Provided that where the capital goods are sent directly to a jobworker, the period of three years
shall be counted from the date of receipt of capital goods by the jobworker.
(7) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 6) shall apply to m oulds and dies, jigs and
fixtures, or tools sent out to a jobworker for jobwork.
Explanation. — For the purpose of this section, “principal” means the person referred to in
[20. Manner of distribution of credit by Input Service Distributor. — (1) Any office of the
supplier of goods or services or both which receives tax invoices towards the receipt of input services,
including invoices in respect of services liable to tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section
[of this Act or under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 5 of the Integrated Goods and
Services Tax Act] , for or on behalf of distinct persons referred to in section 25, shall be required to be
registered as Input Service Distributor under clause ( viii) of section 24 and shall distribute the input tax
credit in respect of such invoices.
(2) The Input Service Distributor shall distribute the credit of State tax or integrated tax charged on
invoices received by him, including the credit of State or in tegrated tax in respect of services subject to
levy of tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 9 [of this Act or under sub -section (3) or
sub-section (4) of section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act] paid by a distinct person
registered in the same State as the said Input Service Distributor, in such manner, within such time and
subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed.
(3) The credit of State tax shall be distributed as State tax or integrated tax and integrated tax as
integrated tax or State tax, by way of issue of a document containing the amount of input tax credit, in
such manner as may be prescribed.]
21. Manner of recovery of credit distributed in excess. –– Where the Input Service Distributor
distributes the credit in contravention of the provisions contained in section 20 resulting in excess
distribution of credit to one or more recipients of credit, the excess credit so distributed shall be recovered
from such recipients along with interest, and the provisions of section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] ,
as the case may be, shall, mutatis mutandis , apply for determination of amount to be recovered.

These words, figures and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 10, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

CHAPTER VI
REGISTRATION
22. Persons liable for registration. –– (1) Every supplier making a taxable supply of goods or
services or both in the State shall be liable to be registered under this Act if his aggregate turnover in a
financial year exceeds twenty lakh rupees :
Provided that where such person makes taxable supplies of goods or services or both from any of
the special category States, he shall be liable to be registered if his aggregate turnover in a financi al year
exceeds ten lakh rupees :
[Provided further that, the Government may, at the requ est of a special category State and on the
recommendations of the Council, enhance the aggregate turnover referred to in the first proviso from ten
lakh rupees to such amount, not exceeding twenty lakh rupees and subject to such conditions and
limitations, as may be so notified :]
[Provided also that, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, enhance the
aggregate turnover from twenty lakh rupees to such amount not exceeding forty lakh rupees in case of
supplier who is engaged exclusively in the supply of goods, subject to such conditions and limitations,
as may be notified.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this sub -section, a person shall be considered to be engaged
exclusively in the supply of goods even if he is engaged in exempt supp ly of services provided by way
of extending deposits, loans or advances in so far as the consideration is represented by way of interest
or discount.]
(2) Every person who, on the day immediately preceding the appointed day, is registered or holds
a licen ce under an existing law, shall be liable to be registered under this Act with effect from the
appointed day.
(3) Where a business carried on by a taxable person registered under this Act is transferred, whether
on account of succession or otherwise, to another person as a going concern, the transferee or the
successor, as the case may be, shall be liable to be regi stered with effect from the date of such transfer
or succession.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3), in a case of transfer pursuant
to sanction of a scheme or an arrangement for amalgamation or, as the case may be, de -merge r of two or
more companies pursuant to an order of a High Court, Tribunal or otherwise, the transferee shall be liable
to be registered, with effect from the date on which the Registrar of Companies issues a certificate of
incorporation giving effect to su ch order of the High Court or Tribunal.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this section, –– (i) the expression “aggregate turnover” shall
include all supplies made by the taxable person, whether on his own account or made on behalf of all his
principals ;
(ii) the supply of goods, after completion of job work, by a registered jobworker shall be
treated as the supply of goods by the principal referred to in section 143, and the value of such
goods shall not be included in the aggregate turno ver of the regist ered jobworker ;
(iii) the expression “special category States” shall mean the States as specified in sub -clause
(g) of clause ( 4) of article 279A of the Constitution [except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and
the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himac hal Pradesh, Meg halaya, Sikkim and Uttarakhand.]
23. Persons not liable for registration. — (1) The following persons shall not be liable to
registration, namely :—

This proviso was inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 11( a), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
These words were inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 11( b), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(a) any person engaged exclusively in the business of supplying goods or services or both t hat
are not liable to tax or wholly exempt from tax under this Act or under the Integr ated Goods and
Services Tax Act ;
(b) an agriculturist, to the extent of supply of produce out of cultivation of land.
[(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary con tained in sub -section ( 1) of section 22 or section
24, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, subject to such
conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, specify the category of persons who may be
exempted from obtaini ng registration under this Act.]
24. Compulsory registration in certain cases. — Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 1) of section 22, the following categories of persons shall be required to be registered under
this Act, —
(i) persons making any inter -State taxable supply ;
(ii) casual taxable persons ma king taxable supply ;
(iii) persons who are required to pay tax under reverse charge ;
(iv) person who are required to pay tax under sub -section ( 5) of section 9 ;
(v) non -reside nt taxabl e persons making taxable supply ;
(vi) persons who are required to deduct tax under section 51, whether or not separ ately
registered under this Act ;
(vii) persons who make taxable supply of goods or services or both on behalf of other taxable
persons w hether as an agent or otherwise ;
(viii) Input Service Distributor, whether or not separ ately registered under this Act ;
(ix) persons who supply goods or services or both, other than supplies specified under
sub-section ( 5) of section 9, through su ch electronic commerce operator who is required to collect
tax at sourc e under section 52 ;
(x) every electronic commerce operator [who is required to collect tax at source under section
52];
(xi) every person supplying online information and data base a ccess or retrieval services from
a place outside India to a person in India, other than a registered person ; [* * *]
[(xi-a) every person supplying online money gaming from a place out side India to a person
in India ; and]
(xii) such other person or class of persons as may be notified by the Government on the
recommendations of the Council.
25. Procedure for registration. — (1) Every person who is liable to be registered under section
or section 24 shall apply for registrati on within thirty days from the date on which he becomes liable
to registration, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed :
Provided that a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person shall apply for registration
at leas t five days prior to the commencement of business :
[Provided further that, a person having a unit, as defined in the S pecial Economic Zones Act, 2005
(28 of 2005) , in a Special Economic Zone or being a Special Economic Zone developer shall have to

Sub-section ( 2) was substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st July 2017 by Mah.
of 2023, s. 5.
These words and figures were inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 12, w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
This clause was inserted by Mah. 1 of 2024, s. 3( b), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
This proviso was inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 13( a), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.

apply for a separate registration, as distinct from his place of business located outside the Special
Economic Zone in the same State.]
Explanation. — Every person who makes a supply from the territorial waters of India shall obtain
registration in the State whe re the nearest point of the appropriate baseline is located in the State.
(2) A person seeking registration under this Act shall b e granted a single registration :
[Provided that, a person having multiple place of business in the State may be granted a s eparate
registration for each such place of business, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.]
(3) A person, though not liable to be registered under section 22 or section 24 may get himself
registered voluntarily, and all provisions of this Act, as are applicable to a registered person, shall apply
to such person.
(4) A person who has obtained or is required to obtain more than one registration, whether in one
State or Union territory or more than one State or Union territory shall, in respect of each such
registration, be treated as distinct persons for the purposes of this Act.
(5) Where a person who has obtained or is required to obtain registration in a State or Union
territory in respect of an establishment, has an establishment in another State or Union territory, then
such establishments shall be treated as establishments of d istinct persons for the purposes of this Act.
(6) Every person shall have a Permanent Account Number issued under the Income -tax Act, 1961
(43 of 1961) in order to be eligible for grant of registration:
Provided that a person required to deduct tax under section 51 may have, in lieu of a Permanent
Account Number, a Tax Deduction and Collection Account Number issued under the said Act in order
to be eligible for grant of registration.
[(6A) Every registered person shall undergo authentication, or furnish proof of possession of
Aadhaar number, in such form and manner and within such time as may be prescribed:
Provided that, if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to the registered person, such person shall be
offered alternate and viable means of identificat ion in such manner as Government may, on the
recommendations of the Council, prescribe:
Provided further that, in case of failure to undergo authentication or furnish proof of possession of
Aadhaar number or furnish alternate and viable means of identific ation, registration allotted to such
person shall be deemed to be invalid and the other provisions of this Act shall apply as if such person
does not have a registration.
(6B) On and from the date of notification, every individual shall, in order to be el igible for grant of
registration, undergo authentication, or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number, in such manner
as the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, specify in the said notification:
Provided that, if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to an individual, such individual shall be
offered alternate and viable means of i dentification in such manner as the Government may, on the
recommendations of the Council, specify in the said notification.
(6C) On and from the date of not ification, every person, other than an individual, shall in order to
be eligible for grant of registration, undergo authentication, or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar
number of the Karta, Managing Director, whole time Director, such number of partne rs, Members of
Managing Committee of Association, Board of Trustees, authorised representative, authorized signatory
and such other class of persons, in such manner, as the Government may, on the recommendations of the
Council, specify in the said notifica tion:
Provided that, where such person or class of persons have not been assigned the Aadhaar number,
such person or class of persons shall be offered alternate and viable means of identification in such
manner as the Government may, on the recommendation s of the Council, specify in the said notification.

This proviso was substituted for the existing proviso by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 13( b), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(6D) The provisions of sub -section ( 6A) or sub -section ( 6B) or sub -section ( 6C) shall not apply to
such person or class of persons or part of the State, as the Government may, on the recommendations of
the Council, specify by notification.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this section, the expression “Aadhaar number” shall have the
same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( a) of section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial
and Other Subsidie s, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016) .]
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6), a non -resident taxable person may be
granted registration under sub -section ( 1) on the basis of such other documents as may be prescribed.
(8) Whe re a person who is liable to be registered under this Act fails to obtain registration, the
proper officer may, without prejudice to any action which may be taken under this Act or under any other
law for the time being in force, proceed to register such p erson in such manner as may be prescribed.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),––
(a) any specialised agency of the United Nations Organisation or any Multilateral Financial
Institution and Organisation notified under the United Nat ions (Privileges and Immunities) Act,
(46 of 1974), Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries; and
(b) any other person or class of persons, as may be notified by the Commissioner,
shall be granted a Unique Identity Number in such manner and for such purposes, including refund of
taxes on the notified supplies of goods or services or both received by them, as may be prescribed.
(10) The registration or the Unique Identity Number sha ll be granted or rejected after due
verification in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed.
(11) A certificate of registration shall be issued in such form and with effect from such date as may
be prescribed.
(12) A registration or a Uni que Identity Number shall be deemed to have been granted after the
expiry of the period prescribed under sub -section ( 10), if no deficiency has been communicated to the
applicant within that period.
26. Deemed registration. — (1) The grant of registration or the Unique Identity Number under the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be a grant of registration or the Unique Identity
Number under this Act subject to the condition that the application for registration or the Unique Identity
Num ber has not been rejected under this Ac t within the time specified in sub-section ( 10) of section 25.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 10) of section 25, any rejection of
application for registration or the Unique Identity Number under the Central Goods and Services Tax
Act shall be deemed to be a rejection of application for registration under this Act.
27. Special provisions relating to casual taxable person and non -resident taxable
person.— (1) The certificate of registration issued to a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable
person shall be valid for the period specified in the application for registration or ninety days from the
effective date of registration, whichever is earlier and such person shall make taxable supplies only after
the issuance of the c ertificate of registration :
Provided that the proper officer may, on sufficient cause being shown by the said taxable pers on,
extend the said period of ninety days by a further period not exceeding ninety days.
(2) A casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person shall, at the time of submission of
application for registration under sub -section ( 1) of section 25, mak e an advance deposit of tax in an
amount equivalent to the estimated tax liability of such person for the period for which the registration
is sought :
Provided that where any extension of time is sought under sub -section ( 1), such taxable person
shall dep osit an additional amount of tax equivalent to the estimated tax liability of such person for the
period for which the extension is sought.

(3) The amount deposited under sub -section ( 2) shall be credited to the electronic cash ledger of
such person and s hall be utilised in the manner provided under section 49.
28. Amendment of registration. — (1) Every registered person and a person to whom a Unique
Identity Number has been assigned shall inform the proper officer of any changes in the information
furnis hed at the time of registration or subsequent thereto, in such form and manner and within such
period as may be prescribed.
(2) The proper officer may, on the basis of information furnished under sub -section ( 1) or as
ascertained by him, approve or reject amendments in the registration particulars in such manner and
within s uch period as may be prescribed :
Provided that approval of the proper officer shall not be required in respect of amendment of such
particulars as may be prescribed :
Provided further t hat the proper officer shall not reject the application for amendment in the
registration particulars without giving the person an opportunity of being heard.
(3) Any rejection or approval of amendments under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act shall
be deemed to be a rejection or approval under this Act.
29. Cancellation [or suspension] of registration. — (1) The proper officer may, either on his
own motion or on an application filed by the registered person or by his legal heirs, in case of death of
such person, cancel the registration, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, having
regard to the circumstances where, —
(a) the business has been discontinued, transferred fully for any reason including death of the
proprietor, amalgamated with other legal entity, de merged or otherwise disposed of ; or
(b) there is any change in the constitution of t he business ; or
[(c) the taxable person is no longer liable to be registered under section 22 or section 24 or
intends to optout of the registration voluntarily made under sub -section ( 3) of section 25 :]
[Provided that, during pendency of the proceedings relating to cancellation of registration,
filed by the registered person, the registration may be suspended for such period and in such manner
as may be prescribed.]
(2) The proper officer may cancel the registration of a person from such date, including any
retrospective date, as he may deem fit, where, ––
(a) a registered person has contravened such provisions of the Act or the rules made
thereunder as may be prescribed ; or
(b) a person paying tax under section 10 has not furnished [the return for a financial year
beyond three months from the due date of furnishing the said return] ; or
(c) any registered person, other than a p erson specified in clause ( b), has not furnished returns
for [such continuous tax period as may be prescribed] ; or
(d) any person who has taken voluntary registration under sub -section ( 3) of section 25 has
not commenced business within six month s from t he date of registration ; or
(e) registration has been obtained by means of fraud, wilful misst atement or suppression of
facts :
Provided that the proper officer shall not cancel the registration without giving the perso n an
opportunity of being heard :

These words were substituted for the words “returns for three consecutive tax periods” by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 3( a), w.e.f .
1st October 2022.
These words were substituted for the words “a continuous period of six months” by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 3( b), w.e.f .
1st October 2022.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
[Provided further that, during pendency of the proceedings relating to cancellation of
registration, the proper officer may suspend the registration for such period and in such manner as
may be prescribed.]
(3) The cancellation of registration under this section shall not affect the liability of the person to
pay tax and other dues under this Act or to discharge any obligation under this Act or the rules made
thereunder for any period prior to the date of cancellation whether or not such tax and other dues are
determined before or after the date of cancellation.
(4) The cancellation of registration under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed
to be a cancellation of registration under this Act.
(5) Every registered person whose registratio n is cancelled shall pay an amount, by way of debit in
the electronic credit ledger or electronic cash ledger, equivalent to the credit of input tax in respect of
inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock or capital goods
or plant and machinery on the day immediately preceding the date of such cancellation or the output tax
payable on such goods, whichever is higher, calculated in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that in case of capital goods or pl ant and machinery, the taxable person shall pay an
amount equal to the input tax credit taken on the said capital goods or plant and machinery, reduced by
such percentage points as may be prescribed or the tax on the transaction value of such capital goods or
plant and machinery under section 15, whichever is higher.
(6) The amount payable under sub -section ( 5) shall be calculated in such manner as may be
prescribed.
30. Revocation of cancellation of registration. — (1) Subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed, any registered person, whose registration is cancelled by the proper officer on his own
motion, may apply to such officer for revocation of cancellation of the registration in [such manner,
within such ti me and subject to such conditions and restrictions, as may be prescribed .]
[* * *]
(2) The proper officer may, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, by order,
either revoke cancellation of the registration or reject the application :
Provided that the application for revocation of cancellation of registration shall not be rejected
unless the applicant has been give n an opportunity of being heard:
[Provided further that, such revocation of cancellation of registration shall be subject to such
conditions and restrictions, as may be prescribed .]
(3) The revocation of cancellation of registration under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act
shall be deemed to be a revocation of cancellation of registration under this Act.
CHAPTER VII
TAX INVOICE , CREDIT AND DEBIT NOTES
31. Tax invoice .–– (1) A registered person supplying taxable goods shall, before or at the
time of, ––
(a) removal of goods for supply to the recipient, where the supply involves movement of
goods; or
(b) delivery of goods or making available thereof to the recipient, in any other case, issue a
tax invoice showing the description, quantity and value of goods, the tax charged thereon and such
other particulars as may be prescribed:

These words were substituted f or the words “the prescribed manner within thirty days from the date of service of the
cancellation order:” by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 6( a), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
This proviso was added by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 11, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification,
specify the categories of goods or supplies in respect of which a tax invoice shall be issued, within such
time and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) A registered person supplying taxable ser vices shall, before or after the provision of service but
within a prescribed period, issue a tax invoice, showing the description, value, tax charged thereon and
such other particulars as may be prescribed:
[Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, ––
(a) specify the categories of services or supplies, in respect of which a tax invoice shall be
issued, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) subject to the condition mentioned therein, specify the categories of services in respect of
which, ––
(i) any other document issued in relation to the supply shall be deemed to be a tax
invoice; or
(ii) tax invoice may not be issued.]
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2)––
(a) a registered person may, within one month from the date of issuance of certificate of
registration and in such manner as may be prescribed, issue a revised invoice against the invoice
already issued during the period beginning with the effective date of registration till the date of
issuance of certificate of registration to him;
(b) a registered person may not issue a tax invoice if the value of the goods or services or both
supplied is less than two hundred rupees subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(c) a registered person supplying exempted goods or services or both or paying tax under the
provisions of section 10 shall issue, instead of a tax invoice, a bill of supply containing such
particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the registered person may not issue a bill of supply if the value of the goods or
services or both supplied is less than two hundred rupees subject to such conditions and in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(d) a registered person shall, on receipt of advance payment with respect to any supply of
goods or services or both, issue a receipt voucher or any other document, containing such
particulars as may be prescribed, evidencing receipt of such payment;
(e) where, on receipt of advance payment with respect to any supply of goods or services or
both the registered person issues a receipt voucher, but subsequently no supply is made and no tax
invoice is issu ed in pursuance thereof, the said registered person may issue to the person who had
made the payment, a refund voucher against such payment;
(f) a registered person who is liable to pay tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of
services or both received by him from the supplier who is not registered on the date of receipt of
goods or services or both;
(g) a registered person who is liable to pay tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of
[Explanation .— For the purposes of clause ( f), the expression “supplier who is not
registered” shall include the supplier who is registered solely for the purpose of deduction of tax
under section 51 .]

This Explan ation was inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 12( b), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(4) In case of continuous supply of goods, where successive statements of accounts or successive
payments are involved, the invoice shall be issued before or at the time each s uch statement is issued or,
as the case may be, each such payment is received.
(5) Subject to the provisions of clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3), in case of continuous supply of
services, ––
(a) where the due date of payment is ascertainable from the contrac t, the invoice shall be
issued on or before the due date of payment;
(b) where the due date of payment is not ascertainable from the contract, the invoice shall be
issued before or at the time when the supplier of service receives the payment;
(c) where the payment is linked to the completion of an event, the invoice shall be issued on
or before the date of completion of that event.
(6) In a case where the supply of services ceases under a contract before the completion of the
supply, the invoice shall b e issued at the time when the supply ceases and such invoice shall be issued
to the extent of the supply made before such cessation.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where the goods being sent or taken on
approval for sale or ret urn are removed before the supply takes place, the invoice shall be issued before
or at the time of supply or six months from the date of removal, whichever is earlier.
Explanation .–– For the purposes of this section, the expression “tax invoice” shall include any
revised invoice issued by the supplier in respect of a supply made earlier.
[31A. Facility of digital payment to recipient. –– The Government may, on the recommendations
of the Council, prescribe a class of registered persons who shall provide prescribed modes of electronic
payment to the recipient of supply of goods or services or both made by him and give option to such
recipient to make payment accordingly, in such man ner and subject to such conditions and restrictions,
as may be prescribed.]
32. Prohibition of un -authorised collection of tax. –– (1) A person who is not a registered person
shall not collect in respect of any supply of goods or services or both any amou nt by way of tax under
this Act.
(2) No registered person shall collect tax except in accordance with the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder.
33. Amount of tax to be indicated in tax invoice and other documents. –– Notwithstanding
anythi ng contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, where any supply is made for
a consideration, every person who is liable to pay tax for such supply shall prominently indicate in all
documents relating to assessment, tax invoice and o ther like documents, the amount of tax which shall
form part of the price at which such supply is made.
34. Credit and Debit Notes. –– (1) [Where one or more tax invoices have] been issued for supply
of any goods or services or both and the taxable value or tax charged in that tax invoice is found to
exceed the taxable value or tax payable in respect of such supply, or where the goods supplie d are
returned by the recipient, or where goods or services or both supplied are found to be deficient, the
registered person, who has supplied such goods or services or both, may issue to the recipient a [one or
more credit notes for supplies made in a f inancial year] containing such particulars as may be prescribed.
(2) Any registered person who issues a credit note in relation to a supply of goods or services or
both shall declare the details of such credit note in the return for the month during which such credit note
has been issued but not later than [the thirtieth day of November] following the end of the financial year
in which such supply was made, or the date of furnishing of the relevant annual return, whichever is
earlier, and the tax liabilit y shall be adjusted in s uch manner as may be prescribed :

2019.
These words were substituted for the word “September” by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 4, w.e.f . 1st October 2022.

[Provided that no reduction in output tax liability of the supplier shall be permitted, if the ––
(i) input tax credit as is attributable to such a credit note, if availed, has not been reversed by
the recipient, where such recipient is a registered person; or
(ii) incidence of tax on such supply has been passed on to any other person, in other cases.]
(3) [Where one or more tax invoices have] been issued for supply of any goods or services or both
and the taxable value or tax charged in that tax invoice is found to be less than the taxable value or tax
payable in respect of such supply, the registered perso n, who has supplied such goods or services or both,
shall issue to the recipient [one or more debit notes for supplies made in a financial year] containing
such particulars as may be prescribed.
(4) Any registered person who issues a debit note in relati on to a supply of goods or services or
both shall declare the details of such debit note in the return for the month during which such debit note
has been issued and the tax liability shall be adjusted in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation .–– For the purposes of this Act, the expression “debit note” shall include a
supplementary invoice.
CHAPTER VIII
ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS
35. Accounts and other records. –– (1) Every registered person shall keep and maintain, at his
principal place of business, as mentioned in the certificate of registration, a true and correct account of —
(a) production or manufa cture of goods ;
(b) inward and outward supp ly of goods or services or both ;
(c) stock of goods ;
(d) input tax credit availed ;
(e) output tax payable and paid ; and
(f) such other particulars as may be prescribed:
Provided that where more than one place of business is specified in the certificate of registrati on,
the accounts relating to each place of business shall be kept at such places of business:
Provided further that the registered person may keep and maintain such accounts and other
particulars in electronic form in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every owner or operator of warehouse or godown or any other place used for storage of goods
and every transporter, irrespective of whether he is a registered person or not, shall maintain records of
the consigner, consignee and other relevant details of the goods in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Commissioner may notify a class of taxable persons to maintain additional accounts or
documents for such purpose as may be specified therein.
(4) Where the Commissioner considers that any class of ta xable persons is not in a position to keep
and maintain accounts in accordance with the provisions of this section, he may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, permit such class of taxable persons to maintain accounts in such manner as may be
prescribed .
[**]
(6) Subject to the provisions of clause ( h) of sub -section ( 5) of section 17, where the registered
person fails to account for the goods or services or both in accordance with the provisions of sub -section
(1), the proper officer shall determine the amount of tax payable on the goods or services or both that are
not accounted for, as if such goods or services or both had been supplied by such person and the

2019.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
provisions of section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] , as the case may be, shall, mutati s mutandis,
apply for determination of such tax.
36. Period of retention of accounts. –– Every registered person required to keep and maintain
books of account or other records in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 35 shall
retain them until the expiry of seventy two months from the due date of furnishing of annual return for
the year pertaining to such accounts and records:
Provided that a registered person, who is a party to an appeal or revision or any other proceedings
before any Appellate Authority or Revisional Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court, whether filed by
him or by the Commissioner, or is under investigation for an offence under Chapter XIX, shall retain the
books of account and other records pertaining to the subject matter of such appeal or revision or
proceedings or investigation for a period of one year after final disposal of such appeal or revision or
proceedings or investigation, or for the period specified above, whichever is later.
CHAPTER IX
RETURNS
37. Furnishing details of outward supplies. –– (1) Every registered person, other than an Input
Service Distributor, a non -resident taxable person and a person paying tax under the provisions of section
or section 51 or section 52, shall furnish, electr onically, [subject to such conditions and restrictions
and] in such form and manner as may be prescribed, the details of outward supplies of goods or services
or both effected during a tax period on or before the tenth day of the month succeeding the said tax period
and such details [shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions, within such time and in such manner
as may be prescribed, be communicated to the recipient of the said supplies] :
[* * *]
[Provided that ] the Commissioner may, for reason s to be recorded in writing, by notification,
extend the time limit for furnishing such details for such class of taxable pers ons as may be specified
therein :
[Provided further that] any extension of time limit notified by the Commissioner of central tax
shall be deemed to be notified by the Commissioner.
[* * *]
(3) Any registered person, who has furnished the details under sub -section ( 1) for any tax period
[* * *] , shall, upon d iscovery of any error or omission therein, rectify such error or omission in such
manner as may be prescribed, and shall pay the tax and interest, if any, in case there is a short payment
of tax on account of such error or omission, in the return to be fur nishe d for such tax period :
Provided that no rectification of error or omission in respect of the details furnished under
sub-section ( 1) shall be allowed after [the thirtieth day of November] following the end of the financial
year to which such detail s pertain, or furnishing of the relevant annu al return, whichever is earlier:
[Provided further that the rectification of error or omission in respect of the details furnished under
sub-section ( 1) shall be allowed after furnishing of the return under section 39 for the month of

These words, figures and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 13 , w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
These words were inserted by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 5( a)(i), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
These words were substituted for the words “shall be communicated to the recipient of the said supplies within such time
and in such manner as may be prescribed” by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 5( a)(ii), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
2022, s. 5( c)(i), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
These words were substituted for the words and figures “furnishing of the return under section 39 for the month of
September” by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 5( c)(ii), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
This proviso was inserted by Mah. Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Order, 2018, s. 3.

September, 2018 till the due date for furnishing the details under sub -section ( 1) for the month of March,
or for the quarter January, 2019 to March, 2019 .]
Explanati on.–– For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression “details of outward supplies” shall
include details of invoices, debit notes, credit notes and revised invoices issued in relation to outward
supplies made during any tax period.
[(4) A registered pe rson shall not be allowed to furnish the details of outward supplies under
sub-section ( 1) for a tax period, if the details of outward supplies for any of the previous tax period s has
not been furnished by him :
Provided that, the Government may, on the r ecommendations of the Council, by notification,
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow a registered person or a
class of registered persons to furnish the details of outward supplies under sub -section ( 1), even if he has
not furnished the details of outward supplies for one or more previous tax periods .]
[(5) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish the details of outward supplies under
sub-section ( 1) for a tax period after the expiry of a period of three years from the due date of furnishing
the said details :
Provided that, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification,
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow a registered person or a
class of registered persons to furnish the details of outward supplies for a tax period under sub -section
(1), even after the expiry of the said period of three years from the due date of furnishing the said details .]
[38. Communication of details of i nward supplies and input tax credit. — (1) The details of
outward supplies furnished by the registered persons under sub -section ( 1) of section 37 and of such
other supplies as may be prescribed, and [a statement] containing the details of input tax credit shall be
made available electronically to the recipients of such supplies in such form and manner, within such
time, and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed.
(2) The [statement referred in] sub-section ( 1) shall consist of —
(a) details of inward supplies in respect of which credit of input tax ma y be available to the
recipient ; [* * *]
(b) details of supplies in respect of which such credit cannot be availed, whether wholly or
partly, by the recipient, [including ] on accou nt of the details of the said supplies being furnished
under sub -section ( 1) of section 37, —
(i) by any registered person within such period of taking re gistration as may be
prescribed ; or
(ii) by any registered person, who has defaulted in payment of tax and where such default
has continued for such period as m ay be prescribed ; or
(iii) by any registered person, the output tax payable by whom in accordance with the
statement of outward supplies furnished by him under the said sub -section during such pe riod,
as may be prescribed, exceeds the output tax paid by him during the said period by such limit
as may be prescribed ; or

This sub -section was added by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 5( d), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
This sub -section was added by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 7, w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
This section was substituted by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 6, w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
2025.
October 2025.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(iv) by any registered person who, during such period as may be prescribed, has availed
credit of input tax of an amount that exce eds the credit that can be availed by him in
accordance with clause ( a), by such limit as may be prescribed ; or
(v) by any registered person, who has defaulted in discharging his tax liability in
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 12) of secti on 49 subject to such conditions
and restrictions as may b e prescribed ; or
(vi) by such other class of persons as may be prescribed .]
[(c) such other details as may be prescribed.]
39. Furnishing of returns. — [(1) Every registered person, other than an Input Service Distributor
or a non -resident taxable person or a person paying tax under the provisions of section 10 or section 51
or section 52 shall, for every calendar month or part thereof, furnish a return, ele ctronically, of inward
and outward supplies of goods or services or both, input tax credit availed, tax payable, tax paid and such
other particulars, in such form and manner, [within such time, and subject to such conditions and
restrictions] , as may be prescribed:
Provided that, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify certain class
of registered persons who shall furnish a return for every quarter or part thereof, subject to such
conditions and restrictions as may b e specified therein.
(2) A registered person paying tax under the provisions of section 10 shall, for each financial year
or part thereof, furnish a return, electronically, of turnover in the State, inward supplies of goods or
services or both, tax payabl e, tax paid and such other particulars in such form and manner, and within
such time, as may be prescribed.]
[(3) Every registered person required to deduct tax at source under section 51 shall electronically
furnish a return for every calendar month of the deductions made during the month in such form and
manner and within such time as may be prescribed :
Provided that, the said registered person shall furnish a return for every calendar month whether or
not any deductions have been made during the said month .]
(4) Every taxable person registered as an Input Service Distributor shall, for every calendar month
or part thereof, furnish, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, a return, electronically, within
thirteen days after the end of such month.
(5) Every registered non -resident taxable person shall, for every calendar month or part thereof,
furnish, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, a return, electronically, within [thirteen] days
after the end of a calendar month or within seven days after the last day of the period of registration
specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 27, whichever is earlier.
(6) The Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notifica tion, extend the time
limit for furnishing the returns under this section for such class of registered pers ons as may be specified
therein :
Provided that any extension of time limit notified by the Commissioner of central tax shall be
deemed to be notifie d by the Commissioner.
[(7) Every registered person, who is required to furnish a return under sub -section ( 1), other than
the person referred to in the proviso thereto, or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 5), shall pay to the
Government the tax due as pe r such return not later than be the last date on which he is required to furnish
such return:

This word was substituted for the word “twenty” by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 7( a), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.

[Provided that, every registered person furnishing return under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) shall
pay to the Government, in such form and manner, and within such time, as may be prescribed, —
(a) an amount equal to the tax due taking into account inward and outward supplies of goods
or services or both, input tax credit availed, tax payable and such other particulars during a
month; or
(b) in lieu of the amount referred to in clause ( a), an amount determined in such manner and
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed]:
Provided further that, every registered person furnishing return under sub -section ( 2) shall pay to
the Government the tax due taking into account turnover in the State, inward supplies of goods or services
or both, tax payable, and such other particulars during a quarter, in such form and manner, and within
such time, as may be prescribed.]
(8) Every registered perso n who is required to furnish a return under sub -section ( 1) or
sub-section ( 2) shall furnish a return for every tax period whether or not any supplies of goods or services
or both have been made during such tax period.
(9) [Where] any registered person after furnishing a return under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2)
or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) discovers any omission or incorrect particulars
therein, other than as a result of scrutiny, audit, inspectio n or enforcement activity by the tax authorities,
he shall rectify such omission or incorrect particulars in the return to be furnished for the month or quarter
during which such omission or incorrect particulars are noticed , subject to pay ment of interest under this
Act:
Provided that no such rectification of any omission or incorrect particulars shall be allowed after
[the thirtieth day of November] following the end of the financial year , or the actual date of furnishing
of relevant annual return, whi chever is earlier.
(10) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish a return for a tax period if the return for
any of the previous tax periods [or the details of outward supplies under sub -section ( 1) of section 37
for the said tax perio d has not been furnished by him :
Provided that, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification,
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow a registered person or a
class of registered persons to fu rnish the return, even if he has not furnished the returns for one or more
previous tax periods or has not furnished the details of outward supplies under sub -section ( 1) of section
for the said tax period .]
[(11) A registered person shall not be allo wed to furnish a return for a tax period after the expiry
of a period of three years from the due dat e of furnishing the said return :
Provided that, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification,
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow a registered person or a
class of registered persons to furnish the return for a tax period, even after the expiry of the said period
of three years from the due date of furnishing the said return .]
40. Fir st Return. –– Every registered person who has made outward supplies in the period between
the date on which he became liable to registration till the date on which registration has been granted
shall declare the same in the first return furnished by him aft er grant of registration.
[41. Availment of input tax credit. — (1) Every registered person shall, subject to such conditions
and restrictions as may be prescribed, be entitled to avail the credit of eligible input tax, as self -assessed,
in his return and such amount shall be credited to his electronic credit ledger.

This word was substituted for the word and figures “Subject to the provisions of sections 37 and 38, if” by Mah. 39 of
These words were substituted for the words “the due date for furnishing of return for the month of September or second
2022.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(2) The credit of input tax availed by a registered person under sub -section ( 1) in respect of such
supplies of goods or services or both, the tax payable whereon has not been paid by the supplier, shall
be reversed along with applicable interest, by the sai d person in s uch manner as may be prescribed :
Provided that, where the said supplier makes payment of the tax payable in respect of the aforesaid
supplies, the said registered person may re -avail the amount of credit reversed by him in such manner as
may be prescribed .]
[* * *]
[44. Annual Return. –– [(1)] Every registered person, other than an Input Service Distributor, a
person paying tax under section 51 or section 52, a casual taxable person and a non -resident taxable
person shall furnish an annual return which may include a self -certified reconciliatio n statement,
reconciling the value of supplies declared in the return furnished for the financial year, with the audited
annual financial statement for every Financial year electronically, within such time and in such form and
in such manner, as may be pre scribed:
Provided that, the Commissioner may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification,
exempt any class of registered persons from filing annual return under this section:
Provided further that, nothing contained in this section shall appl y to any department of the Central
Government or a State Government or a local authority, whose books of account are subject to audit by
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or an auditor appointed for auditing the accounts of local
authorities und er any law for the time being in force.]
[(2) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish an annual return under sub -section ( 1) for
a financial year after the expiry of a period of three years from the due date of fu rnishing the said annual
return:
Provided that, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, and
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow a registered person or a
class of registered persons to furnish an annual return for a financial year under sub -section ( 1), even
after the expiry of the said period of three years from the due date of furnishing the said annual return .]
45. Final return. –– Every registered person who is required to furnish a return under
sub-section ( 1) of section 39 and whose registration has been cancelled shall furnish a final return within
three months of the date of cancellation or date of order of cancellation, whichever is later, in such form
and manner as may be prescribed.
46. Notic e to return defaulters. –– Where a registered person fails to furnish a return under section
or section 44 or section 45, a notice shall be issued requiring him to furnish such return within fifteen
days in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
47. Levy of late fee. –– (1) Any registered person who fails to furnish the details of outward
[* * *] supplies required under section 37 [* * *] or returns required under section 39 or section 45
[or section 52] by the due date shall pay a late fee of one hundred rupees for every day during which
such failure continues subject to a maximum amount of five thousand rupees.
(2) Any registered person who fails to furnish the return required under section 44 by the d ue date
shall be liable to pay a late fee of one hundred rupees for every day during which such failure continues
subject to a maximum of an amount calculated at a quarter per cent. of his turnover in the State.
48. Goods and services tax practitioners. –– (1) The manner of approval of goods and services
tax practitioners, their eligibility conditions, duties and obligations, manner of removal and other
conditions relevant for their functioning shall be such as may be prescribed.

This section was re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 9, w.e.f . 1st October 2023.

(2) A registered person m ay authorise an approved goods and services tax practitioner to furnish
the details of ou tward supplies under section 37 [* * *] and the return under section 39 or section 44 or
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the responsibility for correctness of any
particulars furnished in the return or other details filed by the goods and ser vices tax practitioners shall
continue to rest with the registered person on whose behalf such return and details are furnished.
CHAPTER -X
PAYMENT OF TAX
49. Payment of tax, interest, penalty and other amounts. –– (1) Every deposit made towards
tax, inter est, penalty, fee or any other amount by a person by internet banking or by using credit or debit
cards or National Electronic Fund Transfer or Real Time Gross Settlement or by such other mode and
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be presc ribed, shall be credited to the electronic cash
ledger of such person to be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The input tax credit as self -assessed in the return of a registered person shall be credited to his
electronic credit ledger, i n accordance with [section 41 [* * *]], to be maintained in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(3) The amount available in the electronic cash ledger may be used for making any payment towards
tax, interest, penalty, fees or any other amount payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder in such manner and subject to such condit ions and within such time as may be prescribed.
(4) The amount available in the electronic credit ledger may be used for making any payment
towards output tax under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act in such manner
and subject to such conditions [and restrictions] and within such time as may be prescribed.
(5) The amount of input tax credit available in the electronic credit ledger of the registered person
on account of ––
(a) integrated tax shall first be utilised towards payment of integrated tax and the amount
remaining, if any, may be utilised towards the payment of central tax and State tax, or as the case
may be, Union territory tax, in tha t order ;
(b) the central tax shall first be utilised towards payment of central tax an d the amount
remaining, if any, may be utilised toward s the payment of integrated tax ;
(c) the State tax shall first be utilised towards payment of State tax and the amount remaining,
if any, may be utilised toward s the payment of integrated tax :
[Provided that, the input tax credit on account of State tax shall be utilized towards payment
of integrated tax only where the balance of the input tax credit on account of central tax is not
availabl e for payment of integrated tax ;]
(d) the Union territ ory tax shall first be utilised towards payment of Union territory tax and
the amount remaining, if any, may be utilised toward s the payment of integrated tax :
[Provided that the input tax credit on account of Union territory tax shall be utilized towards
payment of integrated tax only where the balance of the input tax credit on account of central tax
is not availabl e for payment of integrated tax ;]

1st October 2022.
1st February 2019.
These words were inserted by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 12( b), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
This proviso was inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 20( b)(i).
This proviso was inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 20( b)(ii).
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(e) the central tax shall not be utilised towards payment of S tate tax or Union territory tax ;
and
(f) the State tax or Union territory tax shall not be utilised towards payment of central tax.
(6) The balance in the electronic cash ledger or electronic credit ledger after payment of tax,
interest, penalty, fee or any other amount payable under this A ct or the rules made thereunder may be
refunded in accordance with the provisions of section 54.
(7) All liabilities of a taxable person under this Act shall be recorded and maintained in an electronic
liability register in such manner as may be prescribe d.
(8) Every taxable person shall discharge his tax and other dues under this Act or the rules made
thereunder in the following order, namely :––
(a) self -assessed tax, and other dues related to returns of previous tax periods ;
(b) self -assessed tax, and other dues related to the r eturn of the current tax period ;
(c) any other amount payable under this Act or the rules made thereunder including the
demand determined under section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] .
(9) Every person who has paid the tax on goods or services or both under this Act shall, unless the
contrary is proved by him, be deemed to have passed on the full incidence of such tax to the recipient of
such goods or services or both.
Explanation .–– For the purposes of this section,
(a) the date of credit to the account of the Government in the authorised bank shall be deemed
to be the date of deposi t in the electronic cash ledger ;
(b) the expression, —
(i) “tax dues” means the tax payable under this Act and does not in clude interest, fee
and penalty ; and
(ii) “other dues” means interest, penalty, fee or any other amount payable under this Act
or the rules made thereunder.
[(10) A registered person may, on the common portal, transfer any amount of tax, interest, penalty,
fee or any other amount available in the electronic cash ledger under this Act, to the electronic cash
ledger for integrated tax, Central tax, State tax or cess, in such form and manner and subject to such
conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed and such transfer shall be deemed to be a refund from
the electronic cash ledger under this Act.
(11) Where any amount has been transferred to the electronic cash ledger under this Act, the same
shall be deemed to be deposited in the said ledger as provided in sub -section (1).]
[(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Government may, on the
recommendations of the Council, subject to such conditions and restrictions, specify such maximum
proportion of output tax liability under this Act or under the Integ rated Goods and Services Tax Act,
(13 of 2017) which may be discharged through the electronic credit ledger by a registered person
or a class of registered persons, as may be prescribed .]
[49A. Utilisation of input tax credit subject to certain conditions. –– Notwithstanding anything
contained in section 49, the input tax credit on account of State tax shall be utilized towards payment of
integrated tax or State tax, as the case may be, only after the input tax credit available on account of
integ rated tax has first been utilized fully towards such payment.

These words, figures and letter was added by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 15, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
This sub -section was added by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 12( c), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
Sections 49A and 49B were inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 21, w.e.f . 1st February 2019.

49B. Order of utilization of input tax credit. –– Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Chapter and subject to the provisions of clause ( e) and clause ( f) of sub -section ( 5) of section 49, the
Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, prescribe the order and manner of utilisation
of the input tax credit on account of integrated tax, central tax, State tax or Union territory tax, as the
case may be, towards payment of any such t ax.]
50. Interest on delayed payment of tax. –– (1) Every person who is liable to pay tax in accordance
with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, but fails to pay the tax or any part thereof
to the Government within the period prescrib ed, shall for the period for which the tax or any part thereof
remains unpaid, pay, on his own, interest at such rate, not exceeding eighteen per cent., as may be notified
by the Government on the recommendations of the Council:
[Provided that, the inter est on tax payable in respect of supplies made during a tax period and
declared in the return for the said period furnished after the due date in accordance with the provisions
of section 39, except where such return is furnished after commencement of any proceedings under
of the tax which is paid by debiting the electronic cash ledger.]
(2) The interest under sub -section ( 1) shall be calculated, in s uch manner as may be prescribed,
from the day succeeding the day on which such tax was due to be paid.
[(3) Where the input tax credit has been wrongly availed and utilised, the registered person shall
pay interest on such input tax credit wrongly availe d and utilised, at such rate not exceeding twenty -four
per cent. as may be notified by the Government, on the recommendations of the Council, and the interest
shall be calculated, in such manner as may be prescribed .]
51. Tax deduction at source. –– (1) No twithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
Act, the Government may mandate, —
(a) a department or establishment of the Central Government or State Government ; or
(b) local authority ; or
(c) Governmental agencies ; or
(d) such persons or category of persons as may be notified by the Government on the
recommendations of the Council,
(hereafter in this section referred to as “the deductor”), to deduct tax at the rate of one per cent. from the
payment made or credited to th e supplier (hereafter in this section referred to as “the deductee”) of
taxable goods or services or both, where the total value of such supply, under a contract, exceeds two
lakh and fifty thousand rupees:
Provided that no deduction shall be made if the l ocation of the supplier and the place of supply is
in a State or Union territory which is different from the State or, as the case may be, Union territory of
registration of the recipient.
Explanation. –– For the purpose of deduction of tax specified above , the value of supply shall be
taken as the amount excluding the central tax, State tax, integrated tax and cess indicated in the invoice.
(2) The amount deducted as tax under this section shall be paid to the Government by the deductor
within ten days af ter the end of the month in which such deduction is made, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
[(3) A certificate of tax deduction at source shall be issued in such form and in such manner as
may be prescribed.]

This proviso was substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted by Mah. 13 of 2021, s. 6, w.e.f . 1st July 2017.
These words, figures and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 17, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
Sub-section ( 3) was substitute d and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st July 2017
by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 13.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
[* * *]
(5) The deductee shall claim cr edit, in his electronic cash ledger, of the tax deducted and reflected
in the return of the deductor furnished under sub -section ( 3) of section 39, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(6) If any deductor fails to pay to the Government the amount deducted as tax under
sub-section ( 1), he shall pay interest in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 50,
in addition to the amount of tax deducted.
(7) The determination of the amount in default under this section shall be made in the manner
specified in section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] .
(8) The refund to the deductor or the deductee arising on account of excess or erroneous deduction
shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of section 54:
Provided that no refun d to the deductor shall be granted, if the amount deducted has been credited
to the electronic cash ledger of the deductee.
52. Collection of tax at source. –– (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
Act, every electronic commerce o perator (hereafter in this section referred to as the “operator”), not
being an agent, shall collect an amount calculated at such rate not exceeding one per cent., as may be
notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council, of the net value of taxable supplies
made through it by other suppliers where the consideration with respect to such supplies is to be collected
by the operator.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “net value of taxable supplies”
shall mea n the aggregate value of taxable supplies of goods or services or both, other than services
notified under sub -section ( 5) of section 9, made during any month by all registered persons through the
operator reduced by the aggregate value of taxable supplies returned to the suppliers during the said
month.
(2) The power to collect the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) shall be without prejudice to any
other mode of recovery from the operator.
(3) The amount collected under sub -section ( 1) shall be paid to the Government by the operator
within ten days after the end of the month in which such collection is made, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(4) Every operator who collects the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) shall furnish a sta tement,
electronically, containing the details of outward supplies of goods or services or both effected through
it, including the supplies of goods or services or both returned through it, and the amount collected under
sub-section ( 1) during a month, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, within ten d ays after the
end of such month :
[Provided that, the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification,
extend the time limit for furnishing the statement for such class of regi stered pers ons as may be specified
therein :
Provided further that, any extension of time limit notified by the Commissioner of Central tax shall
be deemed to be notified by the Commissioner.]
(5) Every operator who collects the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) shall furnish an annual
statement, electronically, containing the details of outward supplies of goods or services or both effected
through it, including the supplies of goods or services or both returned through it, and the amount
collected unde r the said sub -section during the financial year, in such form and manner as may be
prescribed, before the thirty first day of December following the end of such financial year :

These words, figures and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 17, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

[Provided that, the Commissioner may, on the recommendations of the Council and for reasons to
be recorded in writing , by notification, extend the time limit for furnishing the annual statement for such
class of registered persons as may be specified therein :
Provided further that, any extension of time limit notified by the Co mmissioner of Central tax shall
be deemed to be notified by the Commissioner.]
(6) If any operator after furnishing a statement under sub -section ( 4) discovers any omission or
incorrect particulars therein, other than as a result of scrutiny, audit, inspe ction or enforcement activity
by the tax authorities, he shall rectify such omission or incorrect particulars in the statement to be
furnished for the month during which such omission or incorrect particulars are noticed, subject to
payment of interest, as specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 50 :
Provided that no such rectification of any omission or incorrect particulars shall be allowed after
the [thirtieth day of November] following the end of the financial year or the actual date of furnishing
of the relevant annual statement, whichever is earlier.
(7) The supplier who has supplied the goods or services or both through the operator shall claim
credit, in his electronic cash ledger, of the amount collected and reflected in the statement of the opera tor
furnished under sub -section ( 4), in such manner as may be prescribed.
(8) The details of supplies furnished by every operator under sub -section ( 4) shall be matched with
the corresponding details of outward supplies furnished by the concerned supplier registered under this
Act in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.
(9) Where the details of outward supplies furnished by the operator under sub -section ( 4) do not
match with the corresponding details furnished by the supplier under [section 37 or section 39], the
discrepancy shall be communicated to both persons in such manner and within such time as may be
prescribed.
(10) The amount in respect of which any discrepancy is communicated under sub -section ( 9) and
which is not rectified b y the supplier in his valid return or the operator in his statement for the month in
which discrepancy is communicated, shall be added to the output tax liability of the said supplier, where
the value of outward supplies furnished by the operator is more t han the value of outward supplies
furnished by the supplier, in his return for the month succeeding the month in which the discrepancy is
communicated in such manner as may be prescribed.
(11) The concerned supplier, in whose output tax liability any amou nt has been added under
sub-section ( 10), shall pay the tax payable in respect of such supply along with interest, at the rate
specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 on the amount so added from the date such tax was due till
the date of its payment.
(12) Any authority not below the rank of Deputy Commissioner may serve a notice, either before
or during the course of any proceedings under this Act, requ iring the operator to furnish such details
relating to —
(a) supplies of goods or services or both effected through such operator during any
period ; or
(b) stock of goods held by the suppliers making supplies through such operator in the godowns
or warehouses, by whatever name called, managed by such operator and declared as additional
places of business by such suppliers,
as may be specified in the notice .
(13) Every operator on whom a notice has been served under sub -section ( 12) shall furnish the
required information within fifteen working days of the date of service of such notice.
(14) Any person who fails to furnish the information required by the n otice served under
sub-section ( 12) shall, without prejudice to any action that may be taken under section 122, be liable to
a penalty which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.

These words were substituted for the words “ due date for furnishing of statement for the month of September” by Mah. 39
of 2022, s. 14, w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
2019.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, the expression “concer ned supplier” shall mean the
supplier of goods or services or both making supplies through the operator.
[(15) The operator shall not be allowed to furnish a statement under sub -section ( 4) after the expiry
of a period of three years from the due date o f furnishing the said statement :
Provided that, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification,
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow an operator or a class of
operators to furnish a stat ement under sub -section ( 4), even after the expiry of the said period of three
years from the due date of furnishing the said statement .]
53. Transfer of input tax credit. –– On utilisation of input tax credit availed under this Act for
payment of tax dues under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act in accordance with the provisions
of sub -section ( 5) of section 49, as reflected in the valid return furnished under sub -section (1) of section
39, the amount collected as State tax shall stand reduced by an amount equal to such credit so utilised
and the State Government shall transfer an amount equal to the amount so reduced from the State tax
account to the integrated tax acc ount in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.
[53A. Transfer of certain amounts. –– Where any amount has been transferred from the
electronic cash ledger under this Act to the electronic cash ledger under the Central Goods and Services
Tax Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act or under the Goods and Services Tax
(Compensation to States) Act, the Government shall, transfer to the Central tax account or the integrated
tax account or cess account, an amount equal to the amoun t transferred from the electronic cash ledger,
in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.]
CHAPTER XI
REFUNDS
54. Refund of tax. — (1) Any person claiming refund of any tax and interest, if any, paid on such
tax or any other amount paid by him, may make an application before the expiry of two years from the
relevant date in such form and manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that a registered person, claiming refund of any balance in the electronic cash ledger in
accordance with the provisi ons of sub -section ( 6) of section 49, may claim such refund in [such form
and] manner as may be prescribed.
(2) A specialized agency of the United Nations Organization or any Multilateral Financial
Institution and Organization notified under the United N ations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947
(46 of 1947) Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries or any other person or class of persons, as
notified under section 55, entitled to a refund of tax paid by it on inward supplies of goods or services or
both, may make an application for such refund, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, before
the expiry of [two years] from the last day of the quarter in which such supply was received.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 10), a registered person may claim refund of any
unutilised input tax cred it at the end of any tax period :
Provided that no refund of unutilised input tax credit shall be allowed in cases other than —
(i) zero -rated supplies made without payme nt of tax ;
(ii) where the cre dit has accumulated on account of rate of tax on inputs being higher than the
rate of tax on output supplies (other than nil rated or fully exempt supplies), except supplies of
goods or services or both as may be notified by the Government on the recommend ations of the
Council :
Provided further that no refund of unutilised input tax credit shall be allowed in cases where
the goods exported out of India are subj ected to export duty.

Sub-section ( 15) was added by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 10, w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
These words were substituted for the words and figures “ the return furnished under section 39 in such” by Mah. 39 of
2022, s. 15( a), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
These words were substituted for the words “ six months” by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 15( b), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.

[* * *]
(4) The application shall be accompanied by —
(a) such documentary evidence as may be prescribed to establish that a refund is due to the
applicant ; and
(b) such documentary or other evidence (including the documents referred to in section 33)
as the applicant may furnish to establish that the amount of tax a nd interest, if any, paid on such
tax or any other amount paid in relation to which such refund is claimed was collected from, or
paid by, him and the incidence of such tax and interest had not been passed on to any other
person:
Provided that where the amount claimed as refund is less than two lakh rupees, it shall not be
necessary for the applicant to furnish any documentary and other evidences but he may file a
declaration, based on the documentary or other evidences available with him, certifying that the
incidence of such tax and interest had not been passed on to any other person.
(5) If, on receipt of any such application, the proper officer is satisfied that the whole or part of the
amount claimed as refund is refundable, he may make an order acco rdingly and the amount so determined
shall be credited to the Fund referred to in section 57.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), the proper officer may, in the case of
any claim for refund on account of zero -rated supply of goods o r services or both made by registered
persons, other than such category of registered persons as may be notified by the Government on the
recommendations of the Council, refund on a provisional basis, ninety per cent. of the total amount so
claimed, [* * *] in such manner and subject to such conditions, limitations and safeguards as may be
prescribed and thereafter make an order under sub -section ( 5) for final settlement of the refund claim
after due verification of documents furnished by the applicant.
(7) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section ( 5) within sixty days from the date of
receipt of application complete in all respects.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), the refundable amount shall, instead of
being credited to the Fund, be paid to the applicant, if such amount is relatable to —
(a) refund of tax paid on [export] of goods or services or both or on inputs or input services
used in making such [exports] ;
(b) refund of unutilised input tax credit under sub-section ( 3);
(c) refund of tax paid on a supply which is not provided, either wholly or partially, and for
which invoice has not been issued, or where a refund voucher has been issued ;
(d) refund of tax in pursuance of sect ion 77 ;
(e) the tax and i nterest, if any, or any other amount paid by the applicant, if he had not passed
on the incidence of such tax and interest to any other person; or
(f) the tax or interest borne by such other class of applicants as the Government may, on the
recommendation s of the Council, by notification, specify.
(9) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any judgment, decree, order or direction
of the Appellate Tribunal or any court or in any other provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder
or in any other law for the time being in force, no refund shall be made except in accordance with the
provisions of sub -section ( 8).

1st October 2023.
This wo rd was substituted for the words “zero rated supplies” by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 23( a), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
This word was substituted for the words “zero rated supplies” by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 23( a), w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(10) Where any refund is due [* * *] to a registered person who has defaulted in furnishing any
return or who is required to p ay any tax, interest or penalty, which has not been stayed by any court,
Tribunal or Appellate Authority by the specified date, the proper officer may —
(a) withhold payment of refund due until the said person has furnished the return or paid the
tax, inte rest or penalty, as the case may be ;
(b) deduct from the refund due, any tax, interest, penalty, fee or any other amount which the
taxable person is liable to pay but which remains unpaid under this Act or under the existing law.
Explanation. –– For the p urposes of this sub -section, the expression “specified date” shall
mean the last date for filing an appeal under this Act.
(11) Where an order giving rise to a refund is the subject matter of an appeal or further proceedings
or where any other proceedings under this Act is pending and the Commissioner is of the opinion that
grant of such refund is likely to adversely affect the r evenue in the said appeal or other proceedings on
account of malfeasance or fraud committed, he may, after giving the taxable person an opportunity of
being heard, withhold the refund till such time as he may determine.
(12) Where a refund is withheld und er sub -section ( 11), the taxable person shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in section 56, be entitled to interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent. as may
be notified on the recommendations of the Council, if as a result of the appeal or furt her proceedings he
becomes entitled to refund.
(13) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, the amount of advance tax
deposited by a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person under sub -section ( 2) of section
27, sh all not be refunded unless such person has, in respect of the entire period for which the certificate
of registration granted to him had remained in force, furnished all the returns required under section 39.
(14) Notwithstanding anything contained in thi s section, no refund under sub -section ( 5) or
sub-section ( 6) shall be paid to an applicant, if the amount is less than one thousand rupees.
[(15) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no refund of unutilised input tax credit
on account of zero rated supply of goods or of integrated tax paid on account of zero rated supply of
goods shall be allowed where such zero rated supply of goods is subjected to export duty .]
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, ––
(1) “refund” includes refu nd of tax paid on zero -rated supplies of goods or services or both or
on inputs or input services used in making such zero -rated supplies, or refund of tax on the supply
of goods regarded as deemed exports, or refund of unutilised input tax credit as provi ded under
sub-section ( 3).
(2) “relevant date” means —
(a) in the case of goods exported out of India where a refund of tax paid is available in
respect of goods themselves or, as the case may be, the inputs or input services used in such
goods, ––
(i) if the goods are exported by sea or air, the date on which the ship or the aircraft
in which such goods are loaded, leaves India ; or
(ii) if the goods are exported by land, the date on which such goods pass the
frontier ; or
(iii) if the goods are exported by post, the date of despatch of goods by the Post
Office con cerned to a place outside India ;
(b) in the case of supply of goods regarded as deemed exports where a refund of tax paid
is available in respect of the goods, the date on which the return relati ng to s uch deemed
exports is furnished ;

This sub -section was inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 18, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

[(ba) in case of zero -rated supply of goods or services or both to a Special Economic
Zone developer or a Special Economic Zone unit where a refund of tax paid is available in
respect of such supplies themselves, or as the case may be, the inputs or input services used
in such supplies, the due date for furnishing of return under section 39 in respect of such
supplies;]
(c) in the case of services exported out of India where a refund of tax paid is available
in respect of services themselves or, as the case may be, the inputs or input services used in
such services, the date of ––
(i) receipt of payment in convertible foreign exchange [or in Indian rupees
wherever permitted by the Reserve Bank of India], where the supply of services had
been completed prior to the receipt of such payment; or
(ii) issue of invoice, where payment for the services had been received in advance
prior to the date of issue of the invoice;
(d) in case where the tax becomes refundable as a consequence of judgment, decree,
order or direction of the Appellate Authority, Appellate Tribunal or any court, the date of
communication of such judgment, decree, order or direction;
[(e) in the case of refund of unutilised input tax credit under cla use ( ii) of the first
proviso to sub -section ( 3), the due date for furnishing of return under section 39 for the period
in which such claim for refund arises;]
(f) in the case where tax is paid provisionally under this Act or the rules made thereunder,
the date of adjustment of tax after the final assessment thereof;
(g) in the case of a person, other than the supplier, the date of receipt of goods or services
or both by such person; and
(h) in any other case, the date of payment of tax.
55. Refund in certain cases. –– The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
by notification, specify any specialized agency of the United Nations Organization or any Multilateral
Financial Institution and Organization notified under the United Nations (Pri vileges and Immunities)
Act, 1947 (46 of 1947 ), Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries and any other person or class of
persons as may be specified in this behalf, who shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may
be prescribed, be entitled to claim a refund of taxes paid on the notified supplies of goods or services or
both received by them.
56. Interest on delayed refunds. –– If any tax ordered to be refunded under sub -section ( 5) of
sub-section ( 1) of that section, interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent. as may be specified in the
notification issued by the Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be payable in respect
of such refund [for the period of del ay beyond sixty days from the date of receipt of such application
till the date of refund of such tax, to be computed in such manner and subject to such conditions and
restrictions as may be prescribed]:
Provided that where any claim of refund arises from an order passed by an adjudicating authority
or Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court which has attained finality and the same is not
refunded within sixty days from the date of receipt of application filed consequent to such order, interest
at such rate not exceeding nine per cent. as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations
of the Council shall be payable in respect of such refund from the date immediately after the expiry of
sixty days from the date of receipt of application till the date of refund.

This sub -clause was inserted by Mah. 39 of 2022, s. 15( d), w.e.f . 1st October 2022.
These words were inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 23( b)(i).
This sub -clause was substituted for the existing sub -clause by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 23( b)(ii).
These words were substituted for the words “ from the date immediately after the expiry of sixty days from the date of
receipt of application under the said sub -section till the date of refund of such tax” by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 12, w.e.f . 1st
October 2023.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this section, where any order of refund is made by an Appellate
Authority, Appellate Tribunal or any court against an order of the proper officer under sub -section ( 5)
of section 54, the order pa ssed by the Appellate Authority, Appellate Tribunal or the court shall be
deemed to be an order passed under the said sub -section ( 5).
57. Consumer Welfare Fund. — The Government shall constitute a Fund, to be called the
Consumer Welfare Fund and there shal l be credited to the Fund, ––
(a) the amount referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 54;
(b) any income from investment of the amount credited to the Fund; and
(c) such other monies received by it,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
58. Utilisatio n of Fund. — (1) All sums credited to the Fund shall be utilised by the Government
for the welfare of the consumers in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Government or the authority specified by it shall maintain proper and separate account and
other relevant records in relation to the Fund and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form
as may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
CHAPTER –XII
ASSESSMENT
59. Self -assessment. — Every registered person shall self -assess the taxes payable under this Act
and furnish a return for each tax period as specified under section 39.
60. Provisional assessment. — (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), where the taxable
person is unable to determine the value of goods or services or both or determine the rate of tax applicable
thereto, he may request the proper officer in writing giving reasons for payment of tax on a provisional
basis and the proper officer shall pass an order, w ithin a period not later than ninety days from the date
of receipt of such request, allowing payment of tax on provisional basis at such rate or on such value as
may be specified by him.
(2) The payment of tax on provisional basis may be allowed, if the t axable person executes a bond
in such form as may be prescribed, and with such surety or security as the proper officer may deem fit,
binding the taxable person for payment of the difference between the amount of tax as may be finally
assessed and the amou nt of tax provisionally assessed.
(3) The proper officer shall, within a period not exceeding six months from the date of the
communication of the order issued under sub -section ( 1), pass the final assessment order after taking
into account such informati on as may be required for finalizing the assessment:
Provided that the period specified in this sub -section may, on sufficient cause being shown and for
reasons to be recorded in writing, be extended by the Joint Commissioner or Additional Commissioner
for a further period not exceeding six months and by the Commissioner for such further period not
exceeding four years.
(4) The registered person shall be liable to pay interest on any tax payable on the supply of goods
or services or both under provisional assessment but not paid on the due date specified under sub -section
(7) of section 39 or the rules made thereunder, at the rate specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 50,
from the first day after the due date of payment of tax in respect of the said s upply of goods or services
or both till the date of actual payment, whether such amount is paid before or after the issuance of order
for final assessment.
(5) Where the registered person is entitled to a refund consequent to the order of final assessment
under sub -section ( 3), subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 8) of section 54, interest shall be paid on
such refund as provided in section 56.

61. Scrutiny of returns. — (1) The proper officer may scrutinize the return and related particulars
furnis hed by the registered person to verify the correctness of the return and inform him of the
discrepancies noticed, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed and seek his explanation thereto.
(2) In case the explanation is found acceptable, the registered person shall be informed accordingly
and no further action shall be taken in this regard.
(3) In case no satisfactory explanation is furnished within a period of thirty days of being informed
by the proper officer or such further period as may be permitte d by him or where the registered person,
after accepting the discrepancies, fails to take the corrective measure in his return for the month in which
the discrepancy is accepted, the proper officer may initiate appropriate action including those under
or section 74 [or section 74A] .
62. Assessment of non -filers of returns. –– (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] , where a registered person fails to furnish the
return under section 39 or section 45, even after the service of a notice under section 46, the proper
officer may proceed to assess the tax liability of the said person to the be st of his judgement taking into
account all the relevant material which is available or which he has gathered and issue an assessment
order within a period of five years from the date specified under section 44 for furnishing of the annual
return for the f inancial year to which the tax not paid relates.
(2) Where the registered person furnishes a valid return within [sixty days] of the service of the
assessment order under sub -section ( 1), the said assessment order shall be deemed to have been
withdrawn b ut the liability for payment of interest under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 or for payment of
late fee under section 47 shall continue :
[Provided that, where the registered person fails to furnish a valid return within sixty days of the
service of the assessment order under sub -section ( 1), he may furnish the same within a further period of
sixty days on payment of an additional late fee of one hundred rupees for each day of delay beyond sixty
days of the service of the said assessment order and in case he furnishes valid return within such extended
period, the said assessment order shall be deemed to have been withdrawn, but the liability to pay interest
under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 or to pay late fee under section 47 shall continue .]
63. Asses sment of unregistered persons. –– Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] ,where a taxable person fails to obtain registration
even though liable to do so or whose registration has been cancelled under sub-section ( 2) of section 29
but who was liable to pay tax, the proper officer may proceed to assess the tax liability of such taxable
person to the best of his judgment for the relevant tax periods and issue an assessment order within a
period of five y ears from the date specified under section 44 for furnishing of the annual return for the
financial year to which the tax not paid relates:
Provided that no such assessment order shall be passed without giving the person an opportunity
of being heard.
64. Summary assessment in certain special cases. –– (1) The proper officer may, on any evidence
showing a tax liability of a person coming to his notice, with the previous permission of Additional
Commissioner or Joint Commissioner, proceed to assess the tax liability of such person to protect the
interest of revenue and issue an assessment order, if he has sufficient grounds to believe that any delay
in doing so may adversely affect the interest of revenue:
Provided that where the taxable person to whom the liability pertains is not ascertainable and such
liability pertains to supply of goods, the person in charge of such goods shall be deemed to be the taxable
person liable to be assessed and liable to pay tax and any other amount due under this section.

These words, figures and letter were added by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 20, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
These words were substituted by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 13( a), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
This proviso was added by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 13(b), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
These words, figures and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 21, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(2) On an application made by the taxable person within thirty days from the date of receipt of order
passed under sub -section ( 1) or on his own motion, if the Additional Commissioner or Joint
Commissioner considers that such order is erroneous, he may with draw such order and follow the
procedure laid down in section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] .
CHAPTER XIII
AUDIT
65. Audit by tax authorities. –– (1) The Commissioner or any officer authorised by him, by way
of a general or a specific order, may undertake audit of any registered person for such period, at such
frequency and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The officers referred to in sub-section ( 1) may conduct audit at the place of business of the
registered person or in their office.
(3) The registered person shall be informed by way of a notice not less than fifteen working days
prior to the conduct of audit in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The audit under sub -section ( 1) shall be completed within a period of three months from the
date of commencement of the audit :
Provided that where the Commissioner is satisfied that audit in respect of such registered person
cannot be c ompleted within three months, he may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the
period by a further period not exceeding six months.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “commencement of audit” shall
mean the dat e on which the records and other documents, called for by the tax authorities, are made
available by the registered person or the actual institution of audit at the place of business, whichever is
later.
(5) During the course of audit, the authorised offi cer may require the registered person, ––
(i) to afford him the necessary facility to verify the books of account or other documents as
he may require;
(ii) to furnish such information as he may require and render assistance for timely completion
of the a udit.
(6) On conclusion of audit, the proper officer shall, within thirty days, inform the registered person,
whose records are audited, about the findings, his rights and obligations and the reasons for such findings.
(7) Where the audit conducted under sub-section ( 1) results in detection of tax not paid or short
paid or erroneously refunded, or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised, the proper officer may
initiate action under section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] .
66. Special audit. — (1) If at any stage of scrutiny, inquiry, investigation or any other proceedings
before him, any officer not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner, having regard to the nature and
complexity of the case and the interest of revenue, is of the opinion that t he value has not been correctly
declared or the credit availed is not within the normal limits, he may, with the prior approval of the
Commissioner, direct such registered person by a communication in writing to get his records including
books of account e xamined and audited by a chartered accountant or a cost accountant as may be
nominated by the Commissioner.
(2) The chartered accountant or cost accountant so nominated shall, within the period of ninety
days, submit a report of such audit duly signed and certified by him to the said Assistant Commissioner
mentioning therein such other particulars as may be specified:

These words, figures and letter were added by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 22, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
These words, figures and letter were added by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 23, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

Provided that the Assistant Commissioner may, on an application made to him in this behalf by the
registered person or the chartered accoun tant or cost accountant or for any material and sufficient reason,
extend the said period by a further period of ninety days.
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect notwithstanding that the accounts of the
registered person have been audi ted under any other provisions of this Act or any other law for the time
being in force.
(4) The registered person shall be given an opportunity of being heard in respect of any material
gathered on the basis of special audit under sub -section ( 1) which i s proposed to be used in any
proceedings against him under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(5) The expenses of the examination and audit of records under sub -section ( 1), including the
remuneration of such chartered accountant or cost accountant, s hall be determined and paid by the
Commissioner and such determination shall be final.
(6) Where the special audit conducted under sub -section ( 1) results in detection of tax not paid or
short paid or erroneously refunded, or input tax credit wrongly avai led or utilised, the proper officer may
initiate action under section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] .
CHAPTER XIV
INSPECTION , SEARCH , SEIZURE AND ARREST
67. Power of inspection, search and seizure. –– (1) Where the proper officer, not below the rank
of Joint Commissioner, has reasons to believe that ––
(a) a taxable person has suppressed any transaction relating to supply of goods or services or
both or the stock of goods in hand, or has claimed input tax credit in excess of his entitlement under
this Act or has indulged in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder to evade tax under this Act; or
(b) any person engaged in the business of transporting goods or an owner or operator of a
warehouse or a godown or any other place is keeping goods which have escaped payment of tax or
has kept his accounts or goods in such a manner as is likely to cause evasion of tax payable under
this Act,
he may authorise in writing any o ther officer of State tax to inspect any places of business of the taxable
person or the persons engaged in the business of transporting goods or the owner or the operator of
warehouse or godown or any other place.
(2) Where the proper officer, not below the rank of Joint Commissioner, either pursuant to an
inspection carried out under sub -section ( 1) or otherwise, has reasons to believe that any goods liable to
confiscation or any documents or books or things, which in his opinion shall be useful for or r elevant to
any proceedings under this Act, are secreted in any place, he may authorise in writing any other officer
of State tax to search and seize or may himself search and seize such goods, documents or books or
things:
Provided that where it is not pr acticable to seize any such goods, the proper officer, or any officer
authorised by him, may serve on the owner or the custodian of the goods an order that he shall not
remove, part with, or otherwise deal with the goods except with the previous permission of such
officer:
Provided further that the documents or books or things so seized shall be retained by such officer
only for so long as may be necessary for their examination and for any inquiry or proceedings under this
Act.
(3) The documents, books o r things referred to in sub -section ( 2) or any other documents, books or
things produced by a taxable person or any other person, which have not been relied upon for the issue

These words, figures and letter were added by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 24, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
of notice under this Act or the rules made thereunder, shall be returned to such person within a period
not exceeding thirty days of the issue of the said notice.
(4) The officer authorised under sub -section ( 2) shall have the power to seal or break open the door
of any premises or to break open any almirah, electronic devices, box, receptacle in which any goods,
accounts, registers or documents of the person are suspected to be concealed, where access to such
premises, almirah, electronic devices, box or receptacle is denied.
(5) The person from whose custody any documents are seize d under sub -section ( 2) shall be entitled
to make copies thereof or take extracts therefrom in the presence of an authorised officer at such place
and time as such officer may indicate in this behalf except where making such copies or taking such
extracts may, in the opinion of the proper officer, prejudicially affect the investigation.
(6) The goods so seized under sub -section ( 2) shall be released, on a provisional basis, upon
execution of a bond and furnishing of a security, in such manner and of such q uantum, respectively, as
may be prescribed or on payment of applicable tax, interest and penalty payable, as the case may be.
(7) Where any goods are seized under sub -section ( 2) and no notice in respect thereof is given
within six months of the seizure o f the goods, the goods shall be returned to the person from whose
possession they were seized:
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the
proper officer for a further period not exceeding six months.
(8) The Government may, having regard to the perishable or hazardous nature of any goods,
depreciation in the value of the goods with the passage of time, constraints of storage space for the goods
or any other relevant considerations, by notification, speci fy the goods or class of goods which shall, as
soon as may be after its seizure under sub -section ( 2), be disposed of by the proper officer in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(9) Where any goods, being goods specified under sub -section ( 8), have been se ized by a proper
officer, or any officer authorised by him under sub -section ( 2), he shall prepare an inventory of such
goods in such manner as may be prescribed.
(10) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) relating to search a nd
seizure, shall, so far as may be, apply to search and seizure under this section subject to the modification
that sub -section ( 5) of section 165 of the said Code shall have effect as if for the word “Magistrate”,
wherever it occurs, the word “Commission er” were substituted.
(11) Where the proper officer has reasons to believe that any person has evaded or is attempting to
evade the payment of any tax, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, seize the accounts, registers
or documents of such perso n produced before him and shall grant a receipt for the same, and shall retain
the same for so long as may be necessary in connection with any proceedings under this Act or the rules
made thereunder for prosecution.
(12) The Commissioner or an officer authorised by him may cause purchase of any goods or
services or both by any person authorised by him from the business premises of any taxable person, to
check the issue of tax invoices or bills of supply by such taxable p erson, and on return of goods so
purchased by such officer, such taxable person or any person in charge of the business premises shall
refund the amount so paid towards the goods after cancelling any tax invoice or bill of supply
issued earlier.
68. Inspection of goods in movement. –– (1) The Government may require the person in charge
of a conveyance carrying any consignment of goods of value exceeding such amount as may be specified
to carry with him such documents and such devices as may be prescrib ed.
(2) The details of documents required to be carried under sub -section ( 1) shall be validated in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Where any conveyance referred to in sub -section ( 1) is intercepted by the proper officer at any
place, he may requir e the person in charge of the said conveyance to produce the documents prescribed
under the said sub -section and devices for verification, and the said person shall be liable to produce the
documents and devices and also allow the inspection of goods.

69. Power to arrest. –– (1) Where the Commissioner has reasons to believe that person has
committed any offence specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1)
of section 132 which is punishable under clause ( i) or ( ii) of sub-section ( 1), or sub -section ( 2) of the
said section, he may, by order, authorise any officer of State tax to arrest such person.
(2) Where a person is arrested under sub -section ( 1) for an offence specified under sub -section ( 5)
of section 132, the o fficer authorised to arrest the person shall inform such person of the grounds of arrest
and produce him before a Magistrate within twenty four hours.
(3) Subject to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), —
(a) where a person is arrested under sub -section ( 1) for any offence specified under
sub-section ( 4) of section 132, he shall be admitted to bail or in default of bail, forwarded to the
custody of the Magistrate;
(b) in the case of a non -cognizable and bailable offence, th e Deputy Commissioner or the
Assistant Commissioner shall, for the purpose of releasing an arrested person on bail or otherwise,
have the same powers and be subject to the same provisions as an officer -in-charge of a
police station.
70. Power to summon persons to give evidence and produce documents. –– (1) The proper
officer under this Act shall have power to summon any person whose attendance he considers necessary
either to give evidence or to produce a document or any other thing in any inquiry in the same manner,
as provided in the case of a civil court under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(5 of 1908).
[(1A) All persons summoned under sub -section ( 1) shall be bound to attend, either in person or by
an authorised representative, a s such officer may direct, and the person so appearing shall state the truth
during examination or make statements or produce such documents and other things as may be required .]
(2) Every such inquiry referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a “judicial proceedings”
within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
71. Access to business premises. –– (1) Any officer under this Act, authorised by the proper officer
not below the rank of Joint Commissioner , shall have access to any place of business of a registered
person to inspect books of account, documents, computers, computer programs, computer software
whether installed in a computer or otherwise and such other things as he may require and which may b e
available at such place, for the purposes of carrying out any audit, scrutiny, verification and checks as
may be necessary to safeguard the interest of revenue.
(2) Every person in charge of place referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, on demand, make av ailable
to the officer authorised under sub -section ( 1) or the audit party deputed by the proper officer or a cost
accountant or chartered accoun tant nominated under section 66 ––
(i) such records as prepared or maintained by the registered person and declared to the proper
officer in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) trial balance or its equivalent;
(iii) statements of annual financial accounts, duly audited, wherever required ;
(iv) cost audit report, if any, under section 148 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);
(v) the income -tax audit report, if any, under section 44AB of the Income -tax Act, 1961
(43 of 1961) ; and
(vi) any other relevant record,
for the scrutiny by the officer or audit party or the chartered accountant or cost accountant within a period
not exceeding fifteen working days from the day when such demand is made, or such further period as
may be allowed by the said officer or the audit party or the chart ered accountant or cost accountant.

Sub-section ( 1A) was inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 25, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
72. Officers to assist proper officers. –– (1) All officers of Police, Railways, Customs, and those
officers engaged in the collection of land revenue, including village officers, officers of central tax and
officers of the Union territory tax shall assist the proper officers in the implementation of this Act.
(2) The Government may, by notification, empower and require any other class of officers to assist
the proper officers in the implementation of this Act when called upon to do so by the Commissioner.
CHAPTER XV
DEMANDS AND RECOVERY
73. Determ ination of tax [, pertaining to the period upto Financial Year 2023 -24,] not paid
or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilized for any reason
other than fraud or any wilful misstatement or suppression of facts. –– (1) Where it appears to the
proper officer that any tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded, or where input tax
credit has been wrongly availed or utilised for any reason, other than the reason of fraud or any wilful
misstatement or sup pression of facts to evade tax, he shall serve notice on the person chargeable with
tax which has not been so paid or which has been so short paid or to whom the refund has erroneously
been made, or who has wrongly availed or utilised input tax credit, req uiring him to show cause as to
why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice along with interest payable thereon under
(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub -section ( 1) at least three months prior to the
time limit specified in sub -section ( 10) for issuance of order.
(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub -section ( 1), the proper officer may
serve a statement, co ntaining the details of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input
tax credit wrongly availed or utilised for such periods other than those covered under sub -section ( 1), on
the person chargeable with tax.
(4) The service of such statemen t shall be deemed to be service of notice on such person under
sub-section ( 1), subject to the condition that the grounds relied upon for such tax periods other than those
covered under sub -section ( 1) are the same as are mentioned in the earlier notice.
(5) The person chargeable with tax may, before service of notice under sub -section ( 1) or, as the
case may be, the statement under sub -section ( 3), pay the amount of tax along with interest payable
thereon under section 50 on the basis of his own ascertai nment of such tax or the tax as ascertained by
the proper officer and inform the proper officer in writing of such payment.
(6) The proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall not serve any notice under sub -section
(1) or, as the case may be, the statement under sub -section ( 3), in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty
payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(7) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount paid under sub -section ( 5) falls short
of the amount actually payable, he shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in sub -section ( 1) in
respect of such amount which falls short of the amount actually payable.
(8) Where any person chargeable with tax under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section (3) pays the said tax
along with interest payable under section 50 within thirty days of issue of show cause notice, no penalty
shall be payable and all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded.
(9) The proper officer shal l, after considering the representation, if any, made by person chargeable
with tax, determine the amount of tax, interest and a penalty equivalent to ten per cent. of tax or ten
thousand rupees, whichever is higher, due from such person and issue an order .
(10) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section ( 9) within three years from the due
date for furnishing of annual return for the financial year to which the tax not paid or short paid or input
tax credit wrongly availed or utilised relates to or within three years from the date of erroneous refund.

(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6) or sub -section ( 8), penalty under
sub-section ( 9) shall be payable where any amount of self -assessed tax or any amount collected as tax
has not been paid within a period of thirty days from the due dat e of payment of such tax.
[(12) The provisions of this section shall be applicable for determination of tax pertaining to the
period upto Financial Year 2023 -24.]
74. Determination of tax [, pertaining to the period upto Financial Year 2023 -24,] not paid
or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised by reason of
fraud or any wilful misstatement or suppression of facts. –– (1) Where it appears to the proper officer
that any tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or where input tax credit has been
wrongly availed or utilised by reason of fraud, or any wilful misstatement or suppression of facts to
evade tax, he shall serve notice on the person chargeable with tax which has not been so paid or which
has been so short paid or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, or who has wrongly availed or
utilised input tax credit, requiring him to show cause as to why he should not pay the amount specified
in the notice along with interest payable thereon under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to the tax
specified in the notice.
(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub -section ( 1) at least six months prior to the
time limit specified in sub -section ( 10) for issuance of order.
(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub -section ( 1), the proper officer may
serve a statement, containing the details of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input
tax credit wrongly availed or utilised for such periods ot her than those covered under sub -section ( 1), on
the person chargeable with tax.
(4) The service of statement under sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be service of notice under
sub-section ( 1) of section 73, subject to the condition that the grounds reli ed upon in the said statement,
except the ground of fraud, or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, for periods
other than those covered under sub -section ( 1) are the same as are mentioned in the earlier notice.
(5) The person char geable with tax may, before service of notice under sub -section ( 1), pay the
amount of tax along with interest payable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to fifteen per cent.
of such tax on the basis of his own ascertainment of such tax or the tax a s ascertained by the proper
officer and inform the proper officer in writing of such payment.
(6) The proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall not serve any notice under sub -section
(1), in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty payable un der the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder.
(7) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount paid under sub -section ( 5) falls short
of the amount actually payable, he shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in sub -section ( 1) in
respect of such amount which falls short of the amount actually payable.
(8) Where any person chargeable with tax under sub -section ( 1) pays the said tax along with interest
payable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to twenty five p er cent. of such tax within thirty days
of issue of the notice, all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded.
(9) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person
chargeable with t ax, determine the amount of tax, interest and penalty due from such person and issue
an order.
(10) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section ( 9) within a period of five years from
the due date for furnishing of annual return for the fina ncial year to which the tax not paid or short paid
or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised relates to or within five years from the date of erroneous
refund.
(11) Where any person served with an order issued under sub -section ( 9) pays the tax along with
interest payable thereon under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to fifty per cent. of such tax within

The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
thirty days of communication of the order, all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed
to be concluded.
[(12) The provisions of this section shall be applicable for determination of tax pertaining to the
period upto Financial Year 2023 -24.]
Explanation 1 .–– For the purposes of section 73 and this section, —
(i) the expression “all proceedings in respect of th e said notice” shall not include proceedings
under section 132;
(ii) where the notice under the same proceedings is issued to the main person liable to pay tax
and some other persons, and such proceedings against the main person have been concluded under
[sections 122 and 125] are deemed to be concluded.
[* * *]
[74A. Determination of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax
credit wron gly availed or utilised for any reason pertaining to Financial Year 2024 -25 onward. —
(1) Where it appears to the proper officer that any tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously
refunded, or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or util ised, he shall serve notice on the
person chargeable with tax which has not been so paid or which has been so short paid or to whom the
refund has erroneously been made, or who has wrongly availed or utilised input tax credit, requiring him
to show cause a s to why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice along with interest payable
thereon under section 50 and a penalty leviable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder:
Provided that, no notice shall be issued, if the tax w hich has not been paid or short paid or
erroneously refunded or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised in a financial year is
less than one thousand rupees.
(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub -section ( 1) within forty -two months from the
due date for furnishing of annual return for the financial year to which the tax not paid or short paid or
input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised relates to or within forty -two months from the date of
erroneous refu nd.
(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub -section ( 1), the proper officer may
serve a statement, containing the details of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input
tax credit wrongly availed or utilised for such pe riods other than those covered under sub -section ( 1), on
the person chargeable with tax.
(4) The service of such statement shall be deemed to be service of notice on such person under
sub-section ( 1), subject to the condition that the grounds relied upon for such tax periods other than those
covered under sub -section ( 1) are the same as are mentioned in the earlier notice.
(5) The penalty in case where any tax which has not been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded,
or where input tax credit has bee n wrongly availed or utilised, —
(i) for any reason, other than the reason of fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of
facts to evade tax, shall be equivalent to ten per cent. of tax due from such person or ten thousand
rupees, whichever is highe r;
(ii) for the reason of fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax
shall be equivalent to the tax due from such person.

This sub -section was inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 27( 2), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
These words and figures “sections 122, 125, 129 and 130” were substituted by Mah. 13 of 2021, s. 8, w.e.f . 1st January
2022.

(6) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person
chargeable with tax, determine the amount of tax, interest and penalty due from such person and issue
an order.
(7) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section ( 6) within twelve months from the
date of issuance of notice specified in sub -section ( 2):
Provided that, where the proper officer is not able to issue the order within the specified period, the
Commissioner, or an officer authorised by the Commissioner senior in rank to the proper officer but not
below the rank of Joint Commissioner of State tax, may, having regard to the reasons for delay in
issuance of the order under sub -section ( 6), to be recorded in writing, before the expiry of the specified
period, extend the said period further by a maximum of six months.
(8) The person chargeable wit h tax where any tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously
refunded, or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised for any reason, other than the
reason of fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, may, —
(i) before service of notice under sub -section ( 1), pay the amount of tax alongwith interest
payable under section 50 of such tax on the basis of his own ascertainment of such tax or the tax as
ascertained by the proper officer and inform the proper off icer in writing of such payment, and the
proper officer, on receipt of such information shall not serve any notice under sub -section ( 1) or
the statement under sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty
payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;
(ii) pay the said tax alongwith interest payable under section 50 within sixty days of issue of
show cause notice, and on doing so, no penalty shall be payable and all proceedings in respect of
the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded.
(9) The person chargeable with tax, where any tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously
refunded or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised by reason of fraud, or any
wilful -missta tement or suppression of facts to evade tax, may, —
(i) before service of notice under sub -section ( 1), pay the amount of tax alongwith interest
payable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to fifteen per cent. of such tax on the basis of his
own asce rtainment of such tax or the tax as ascertained by the proper officer and inform the proper
officer in writing of such payment, and the proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall not
serve any notice under sub -section ( 1), in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty payable under
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;
(ii) pay the said tax alongwith interest payable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to
twenty -five per cent. of such tax within sixty days of issue of the notice, and on doing so, all
proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded;
(iii) pay the tax alongwith interest payable thereon under section 50 and a penalty equivalent
to fifty per cent. of such tax within sixty days of com munication of the order, and on doing so, all
proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded.
(10) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount paid under clause ( i) of sub -section
(8) or clause ( i) of sub -section (9) falls short of the amount actually payable, he shall proceed to issue
the notice as provided for in sub -section ( 1) in respect of such amount which falls short of the amount
actually payable.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 8), penalty under
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 5) shall be payable where any amount of self -assessed tax or any amount
collected as tax has not been paid within a period of thirty days from the due date of payment of
such tax.
(12) The provisions of this section shall be applicable for determination of tax pertaining to the
Financial Year 2024 -25 onwards.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this section, —
(i) the expression “all proceedings in respect of the said notice” shall not include proceedings
under section 132;
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(ii) where the notice under the same proceedings is issued to the main person liable to pay tax
and some other persons, and such proceedings against the main person have been concluded under
this section, the pro ceedings against all the persons liable to pay penalty under sections 122 and
are deemed to be concluded.
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this Act, the expression “suppression” shall mean
non-declaration of facts or information which a taxable pe rson is required to declare in the return,
statement, report or any other document furnished under this Act or the rules made thereunder, or failure
to furnish any information on being asked for, in writing, by the proper officer .]
75. General provisions relating to determination of tax. –– (1) Where the service of notice or
issuance of order is stayed by an order of a court or Appellate Tribunal, the period of such stay shall be
excluded in computing the period specified in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 10) of section 73 or sub -sections ( 2)
and ( 10) of section 74 [or sub -sections ( 2) and ( 7) of section 74A] , as the case may be.
(2) Where any Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court concludes that the notice issued
under sub-section ( 1) of section 74 is not sustainable for the reason that the charges of fraud or any wilful
misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax has not been established against the person to whom
the notice was issued, the proper officer shall de termine the tax payable by such person, deeming as if
the notice were issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 73.
[(2A) Where any Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court concludes that the penalty
under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 5) of sectio n 74A is not sustainable for the reason that the charges of
fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax has not been established against
the person to whom the notice was issued, the penalty shall be payable by such person, under clause ( i)
of sub -section ( 5) of section 74A .]
(3) Where any order is required to be issued in pursuance of the direction of the Appellate Authority
or Appellate Tribunal or a court, such order shall be issued within two years from the date of
communicatio n of the said direction.
(4) An opportunity of hearing shall be granted where a request is received in writing from the person
chargeable with tax or penalty, or where any adverse decision is contemplated against such person.
(5) The proper officer shall , if sufficient cause is shown by the person chargeable with tax, grant
time to the said person and adjourn the hearing for reasons to be recorded in writing:
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted for more than three times to a person during
the proceedings.
(6) The proper officer, in his order, shall set out the relevant facts and the basis of his decision.
(7) The amount of tax, interest and penalty demanded in the order shall not be in excess of the
amount specified in the notice and no d emand shall be confirmed on the grounds other than the grounds
specified in the notice.
(8) Where the Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court modifies the amount of tax
determined by the proper officer, the amount of interest and penalty shall stand modified accordingly,
taking into account the amount of tax so modified.
(9) The int erest on the tax short paid or not paid shall be payable whether or not specified in the
order determining the tax liability.
[(10) The adjudication proceedings shall be deemed to be concluded, if the order is not issued
within the period specified in su b-section ( 10) of section 73 or in sub -section ( 10) of section 74 or in
sub-section ( 7) of section 74A.]
(11) An issue on which the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court has
given its decision which is prejudicial to the interest of revenue in some other proceedings and an appeal
to the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court or the Supreme Court against such decision of the Appellate

These words, brackets, figures and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 29( 1), w.e.f . 1st Novemb er 2024.
This sub -section was inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 29( 2), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
Sub-section ( 10) was substituted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 29( 3), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court is pending, the period spent between the date of
the decision of the Appellate Authority and that of the Appellate Tribunal or the date of decision of the
Appellate Tribunal and that of the High Court or the date of the decision of the High Court and that of
the Supreme Court shall be excluded in comp uting the period referred to in sub -section ( 10) of section
or sub -section ( 10) of section 74 [or sub -section ( 7) of section 74A] where proceedings are initiated
by way of issue of a show cause notice under the said sections.
(12) Notwithstanding anyt hing contained in section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] , where any
amount of self -assessed tax in accordance with a return furnished under section 39 remains unpaid, either
wholly or partly, or any amount of interest payable on such tax remains unpaid , the same shall be
recovered under the provisions of section 79.
[Explanation .— For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “self -assessed tax” shall
include the tax payable in respect of details of outward supplies furnished under section 37, but not
included in the return furnished under section 39.]
(13) Where any penalty is imposed under section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] , no penalty for
the same act or omission shall be imposed on the same person under any other provision of this Ac t.
76. Tax collected but not paid to Government. –– (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any order or direction of any Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court or in any
other provisions of this Act or the rules made thereun der or any other law for the time being in force,
every person who has collected from any other person any amount as representing the tax under this Act,
and has not paid the said amount to the Government, shall forthwith pay the said amount to the
Governm ent, irrespective of whether the supplies in respect of which such amount was collected are
taxable or not.
(2) Where any amount is required to be paid to the Government under sub -section ( 1), and which
has not been so paid, the proper officer may serve o n the person liable to pay such amount a notice
requiring him to show cause as to why the said amount as specified in the notice, should not be paid by
him to the Government and why a penalty equivalent to the amount specified in the notice should not be
imposed on him under the provisions of this Act.
(3) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person on
whom the notice is served under sub -section ( 2), determine the amount due from such person and
thereupon such person shall pay the amount so determined.
(4) The person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall in addition to paying the amount referred to in
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) also be liable to pay interest thereon at the rate specified under section
from the date such amount was collected by him to the date such amount is paid by him to the
Government.
(5) An opportunity of hearing shall be granted where a request is received in writing from the person
to whom the notice was issued to show cause.
(6) The proper officer shall issue an order within one year from the date of issue of the notice.
(7) Where the issuance of order is stayed by an order of the court or Appellate Tribunal, the period
of such stay shall be excluded in computing the period o f one year.
(8) The proper officer, in his order, shall set out the relevant facts and the basis of his decision.
(9) The amount paid to the Government under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) shall be adjusted
against the tax payable, if any, by the per son in relation to the supplies referred to in sub -section ( 1).
(10) Where any surplus is left after the adjustment under sub -section ( 9), the amount of such surplus
shall either be credited to the Fund or refunded to the person who has borne the incidence of such amount.

These words, brackets, figures and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 29( 4), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
These words, brackets, figures and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 29(5), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
This Explanation was inserted by Mah. 13 of 2021, s. 9, w.e.f . 1st January 2022.
These wor ds, figures and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 29( 6), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(11) The person, who has borne the incidence of the amount, may apply for the refund of the same
in accordance with th e provisions of section 54.
77. Tax wrongfully collected and paid to Central Government or State Government. –– (1) A
registered person who has paid the central tax and State tax on a transaction considered by him to be an
intra-State supply, but which is subsequently held to be an inter -State supply, shall be refunded the
amount of taxes so paid in such manner and su bject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
(2) A registered person who has paid integrated tax on a transaction considered by him to be an
inter-State supply, but which is subsequently held to be an intra -State supply, shall not be required to
pay any interest on the amount of State tax payable.
78. Initiation of recovery proceedings. –– Any amount payable by a taxable person in pursuance
of an order passed under this Act shall be paid by such person within a period of three months from the
date of se rvice of such order failing which recovery proceedings shall be initiated:
Provided that where the proper officer considers it expedient in the interest of revenue, he may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, require the said taxable person to make suc h payment within such
period less than a period of three months as may be specified by him.
79. Recovery of tax. –– (1) Where any amount payable by a person to the Government under any
of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder is not paid, the proper officer shall proceed to
recover the amount by one or more of the following modes, namely: ––
(a) the proper officer may deduct or may require any other specified officer to deduct the
amount so payable from any money owing to such person which may be under the control of the
proper officer or such other specified officer;
(b) the proper officer may recover or may require any other specified officer to recover the
amount so payable by detaining and selling any goods belonging to such person whi ch are under
the control of the proper officer or such other specified officer;
(c) (i) the proper officer may, by a notice in writing, require any other person from whom
money is due or may become due to such person or who holds or may subsequently hold money
for or on account of such person, to pay to the Government either forthwith upon the money
becoming due or being held, or within the time specified in the notice not being before the money
becomes due or is held, so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the amount due from such
person or the whole of the money when it is equal to or less than that amount;
(ii) every person to whom the notice is issued under sub -clause ( i) shall be bound to comply
with such notice, and in particular, where any suc h notice is issued to a post office, banking
company or an insurer, it shall not be necessary to produce any pass book, deposit receipt, policy
or any other document for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being made before
payment is made, n otwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary;
(iii) in case the person to whom a notice under sub -clause ( i) has been issued, fails to make
the payment in pursuance thereof to the Government, he shall be deemed to be a defaulter in res pect
of the amount specified in the notice and all the consequences of this Act or the rules made
thereunder shall follow;
(iv) the officer issuing a notice under sub -clause ( i) may, at any time, amend or revoke such
notice or extend the time for making a ny payment in pursuance of the notice;
(v) any person making any payment in compliance with a notice issued under sub -clause ( i)
shall be deemed to have made the payment under the authority of the person in default and such
payment being credited to the G overnment shall be deemed to constitute a good and sufficient
discharge of the liability of such person to the person in default to the extent of the amount specified
in the receipt;
(vi) any person discharging any liability to the person in default after service on him of the
notice issued under sub -clause ( i) shall be personally liable to the Government to the extent of the
liability discharged or to the extent of the liability of the person in default for tax, interest and
penalty, whichever is less;

(vii) where a person on whom a notice is served under sub -clause ( i) proves to the satisfaction
of the officer issuing the notice that the money demanded or any part thereof was not due to the
person in default or that he did not hold any money for or on ac count of the person in default, at
the time the notice was served on him, nor is the money demanded or any part thereof, likely to
become due to the said person or be held for or on account of such person, nothing contained in
this section shall be deemed to require the person on whom the notice has been served to pay to the
Government any such money or part thereof;
(d) the proper officer may, in accordance with the rules to be made in this behalf, distrain any
movable or immovable property belonging to o r under the control of such person, and detain the
same until the amount payable is paid ; and in case, any part of the said amount payable or of the
cost of the distress or keeping of the property, remains unpaid for a period of thirty days next after
any such distress, may cause the said property to be sold and with the proceeds of such sale, may
satisfy the amount payable and the costs including cost of sale remaining unpaid and shall render
the surplus amount, if any, to such person;
(e) the proper off icer may prepare a certificate signed by him specifying the amount due from
such person and send it to the Collector of the district in which such person owns any property or
resides or carries on his business or to any officer authorised by the Government and the said
Collector or the said officer, on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover from such person
the amount specified thereunder as if it were an arrear of land revenue;
(f) notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)
the proper officer may file an application to the appropriate Magistrate and such Magistrate shall
proceed to recover from such person the amount specified thereunder as if it were a fine imposed
by him.
(2) Where the terms of any bond or other instrument executed under this Act or any rules or
regulations made thereunder provide that any amount due under such instrument may be recovered in
the manner laid down in sub -section ( 1), the amount may, without prejudice to any other m ode of
recovery, be recovered in accordance with the provisions of that sub -section.
(3) Where any amount of tax, interest or penalty is payable by a person to the Government under
any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder and which re mains unpaid, the proper
officer of central tax, during the course of recovery of said tax arrears, may recover the amount from the
said person as if it were an arrear of central tax and credit the amount so recovered to the account of the
Government.
(4) Where the amount recovered under sub -section ( 3) is less than the amount due to the Central
Government and State Government, the amount to be credited to the account of the respective
Governments shall be in proportion to the amount due to each such Gover nment.
[Explanation .–– For the purposes of this section, the word person shall include “distinct persons”
as referred to in sub -section ( 4) or, as the case may be, sub -section ( 5) of section 25.]
80. Payment of tax and other amount in instalments. –– On an application filed by a taxable
person, the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time for payment or
allow payment of any amount due under this Act, other than the amount due as per the liability self assessed in any ret urn, by such person in monthly instalments not exceeding twenty four, subject to
payment of interest under section 50 and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed:
Provided that where there is default in payment of any one instalmen t on its due date, the whole
outstanding balance payable on such date shall become due and payable forthwith and shall, without any
further notice being served on the person, be liable for recovery.
81. Transfer of property to be void in certain cases. –– Where a person, after any amount has
become due from him, creates a charge on or parts with the property belonging to him or in his possession
by way of sale, mortgage, exchange, or any other mode of transfer whatsoever of any of his properties
in favour of any other person with the intention of defrauding the Government revenue, such charge or

This Explanation was inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 24.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
transfer shall be void as against any claim in respect of any tax or any other sum payable by the said
person:
Provided that, such charge or transfer shall not be void if it is made for adequate consideration, in
good faith and without notice of the pendency of such proceedings under this Act or without notice of
such tax or other sum payable by the said person, or with the previous permission of the proper officer.
82. Tax to be first charge on property. –– Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
any law for the time being in force, save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
(31 of 2016) any amount payable by a taxable pers on or any other person on account of tax, interest
or penalty which he is liable to pay to the Government shall be a first charge on the property of such
taxable person or such person.
83. Provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain cases. –– [(1) Where, after the initiation
of any proceeding under Chapter XII, Chapter XIV or Chapter XV, the Commissioner is of the opinion
that for the purpose of protecting the interest of the Government revenue it is necessary so to do, he may,
by an order in writ ing, attach provisionally, any property, including bank account, belonging to be
taxable person or any person specified in sub -section ( 1A) of section 122, in such manner, as may be
prescribed.]
(2) Every such provisional attachment shall cease to have ef fect after the expiry of a period of one
year from the date of the order made under sub -section ( 1).
84. Continuation and validation of certain recovery proceedings. –– Where any notice of
demand in respect of any tax, penalty, interest or any other amoun t payable under this Act, (hereafter in
this section referred to as “Government dues”), is served upon any taxable person or any other person
and any appeal or revision application is filed or any other proceedings is initiated in respect of such
Governmen t dues, then ––
(a) where such Government dues are enhanced in such appeal, revision or other proceedings,
the Commissioner shall serve upon the taxable person or any other person another notice of demand
in respect of the amount by which such Government d ues are enhanced and any recovery
proceedings in relation to such Government dues as are covered by the notice of demand served
upon him before the disposal of such appeal, revision or other proceedings may, without the service
of any fresh notice of deman d, be continued from the stage at which such proceedings stood
immediately before such disposal;
(b) where such Government dues are reduced in such appeal, revision o r in other
proceedings —
(i) it shall not be necessary for the Commissioner to serve upon the taxable person a
fresh notice of demand;
(ii) the Commissioner shall give intimation of such reduction to him and to the
appropriate authority with whom recovery proceedings is pending;
(iii) any recovery proceedings initiated on the basis of the dem and served upon him prior
to the disposal of such appeal, revision or other proceedings may be continued in relation to
the amount so reduced from the stage at which such proceedings stood immediately before
such disposal.
CHAPTER XVI
LIABILITY TO PAY IN CERTAIN CASES
85. Liability in case of transfer of business. –– (1) Where a taxable person, liable to pay tax under
this Act, transfers his business in whole or in part, by sale, gift, lease, leave and license, hire or in any
other manner whatsoever, the t axable person and the person to whom the business is so transferred shall,
jointly and severally, be liable wholly or to the extent of such transfer, to pay the tax, interest or any

Sub-section ( 1) was substituted by Mah. 13 of 2021, s. 10, w.e.f . 1st January 2022.

penalty due from the taxable person upto the time of such transfer, whethe r such tax, interest or penalty
has been determined before such transfer, but has remained unpaid or is determined thereafter.
(2) Where the transferee of a business referred to in sub -section ( 1) carries on such business either
in his own name or in some other name, he shall be liable to pay tax on the supply of goods or services
or both effected by him with effect from the date of such transfer and shall, if he is a registered person
under this Act, apply within the prescribed time for amendment of his c ertificate of registration.
86. Liability of agent and principal. –– Where an agent supplies or receives any taxable goods on
behalf of his principal, such agent and his principal shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay the tax
payable on such goods under this Act.
87. Liability in case of amalgamation or merger of companies. –– (1) When two or more
companies are amalgamated or merged in pursuance of an order of court or of Tribunal or otherwise and
the order is to take effect from a date earlier to the date of the order and any two or more of such
companies have supplied or received any goods or services or both to or from each other during the
period commencing on the date from which the order takes effect till the date of the order, then such
transactions of supply and receipt shall be included in the turnover of supply or receipt of the respective
companies and they shall be liable to pay tax accordingly.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the said order, for the purposes of this Act, the said two
or more companies shall be treated as distinct companies for the period up to the date of the said order
and the registration certificates of the said companies shall be cancelled with effect from the date of the
said order.
88. Liability in cas e of company in liquidation. –– (1) When any company is being wound up
whether under the orders of a court or Tribunal or otherwise, every person appointed as receiver of any
assets of a company (hereafter in this section referred to as the “liquidator”), s hall, within thirty days
after his appointment, give intimation of his appointment to the Commissioner.
(2) The Commissioner shall, after making such inquiry or calling for such information as he may
deem fit, notify the liquidator within three months fro m the date on which he receives intimation of the
appointment of the liquidator, the amount which in the opinion of the Commissioner would be sufficient
to provide for any tax, interest or penalty which is then, or is likely thereafter to become, payable b y the
company.
(3) When any private company is wound up and any tax, interest or penalty determined under this
Act on the company for any period, whether before or in the course of or after its liquidation, cannot be
recovered, then every person who was a director of such company at any time during the period for
which the tax was due shall, jointly and severally, be liable for the payment of such tax, interest or
penalty, unless he proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that such non -recovery cann ot be
attributed to any gross neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the
company.
89. Liability of directors of private company. –– (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) , where any tax, interest or penalty due from a private company in
respect of any supply of goods or services or both for any period cannot be recovered, then, every person
who was a director of the private company during such period shall, jointly and severa lly, be liable for
the payment of such tax, interest or penalty unless he proves that the non -recovery cannot be attributed
to any gross neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the company.
(2) Where a private comp any is converted into a public company and the tax, interest or penalty in
respect of any supply of goods or services or both for any period during which such company was a
private company cannot be recovered before such conversion, then, nothing contained in sub -section ( 1)
shall apply to any person who was a director of such private company in relation to any tax, interest or
penalty in respect of such supply of goods or services or both of such private company:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any personal penalty imposed on
such director.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
90. Liability of partners of firm to pay tax. –– Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary and
any other law for the time being in force, where any firm is liable to pay any tax, interest or penalty under
this Act, the firm and each of the partners of the firm shall, jointly and severally, be liable for such
payment:
Provided that where any partner retires from the firm, he or the firm, shal l intimate the date of
retirement of the said partner to the Commissioner by a notice in that behalf in writing and such partner
shall be liable to pay tax, interest or penalty due upto the date of his retirement whether determined or
not, on that date:
Provided further that if no such intimation is given within one month from the date of retirement,
the liability of such partner under the first proviso shall continue until the date on which such intimation
is received by the Commissioner.
91. Liability of guardians, trustees, etc. –– Where the business in respect of which any tax,
interest or penalty is payable under this Act is carried on by any guardian, trustee or agent of a minor or
other incapacitated person on behalf of and for the benefit of such m inor or other incapacitated person,
the tax, interest or penalty shall be levied upon and recoverable from such guardian, trustee or agent in
like manner and to the same extent as it would be determined and recoverable from any such minor or
other incapaci tated person, as if he were a major or capacitated person and as if he were conducting the
business himself, and all the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall apply accordingly.
92. Liability of Court of Wards, etc. –– Where the estate or any portion of the estate of a taxable
person owning a business in respect of which any tax, interest or penalty is payable under this Act is
under the control of the Court of Wards, the Administrator General, the Official Trustee or any receiver
or ma nager (including any person, whatever be his designation, who in fact manages the business)
appointed by or under any order of a court, the tax, interest or penalty shall be levied upon and be
recoverable from such Court of Wards, Administrator General, Of ficial Trustee, receiver or manager in
like manner and to the same extent as it would be determined and be recoverable from the taxable person
as if he were conducting the business himself, and all the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder sh all apply accordingly.
93. Special provisions regarding liability to pay tax, interest or penalty in certain cases –– (1)
Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), where a person,
liable to pay tax, interest or p enalty under this Act, dies, then ––
(a) if a business carried on by the person is continued after his death by his legal representative
or any other person, such legal representative or other person, shall be liable to pay tax, interest or
penalty due fro m such person under this Act; and
(b) if the business carried on by the person is discontinued, whether before or after his death,
his legal representative shall be liable to pay, out of the estate of the deceased, to the extent to which
the estate is capable of meeting the charge, the tax, interest or penalty due from such person under
this Act, whether such tax, interest or penalty has been determined before his death but has
remained unpaid or is determined after his death.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy C ode, 2016 (31 of 2016), where
a taxable person, liable to pay tax, interest or penalty under this Act, is a Hindu Undivided Family or an
association of persons and the property of the Hindu Undivided Family or the association of persons is
partitioned amon gst the various members or groups of members, then, each member or group of members
shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay the tax, interest or penalty due from the taxable person under
this Act upto the time of the partition whether such tax, pena lty or interest has been determined before
partition but has remained unpaid or is determined after the partition.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), where
a taxable person, liable to pay tax, interest or penalty under this Act, is a firm, and the firm is dissolved,
then, every person who was a partner shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay the tax, interest or
penalty due from the firm under this Act upto the time of dissolution whether such ta x, interest or penalty
has been determined before the dissolution, but has remained unpaid or is determined after dissolution.
(4) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), where
a taxable person liable to pay tax , interest or penalty under this Act, —

(a) is the guardian of a ward on whose behalf the business is carried on by the guardian; or
(b) is a trustee who carries on the business under a trust for a beneficiary, then, if the
guardianship or trust is termin ated, the ward or the beneficiary shall be liable to pay the tax, interest
or penalty due from the taxable person upto the time of the termination of the guardianship or trust,
whether such tax, interest or penalty has been determined before the terminatio n of guardianship
or trust but has remained unpaid or is determined thereafter.
94. Liability in other cases. –– (1) Where a taxable person is a firm or an association of persons
or a Hindu Undivided Family and such firm, association or family has discont inued business ––
(a) the tax, interest or penalty payable under this Act by such firm, association or family upto
the date of such discontinuance may be determined as if no such discontinuance had taken place;
and
(b) every person who, at the time of suc h discontinuance, was a partner of such firm, or a
member of such association or family, shall, notwithstanding such discontinuance, jointly and
severally, be liable for the payment of tax and interest determined and penalty imposed and payable
by such fir m, association or family, whether such tax and interest has been determined or penalty
imposed prior to or after such discontinuance and subject as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act
shall, so far as may be, apply as if every such person or partner or m ember were himself a taxable
person.
(2) Where a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm or an association of persons, the
partners of the firm or members of association, as it existed before and as it exists after the reconstitution,
shall, wit hout prejudice to the provisions of section 90, jointly and severally, be liable to pay tax, interest
or penalty due from such firm or association for any period before its reconstitution.
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, so far as may be, app ly where the taxable person, being
a firm or association of persons is dissolved or where the taxable person, being a Hindu Undivided
Family, has effected partition with respect to the business carried on by it and accordingly references in
that sub -sectio n to discontinuance shall be construed as reference to dissolution or to partition.
Explanation .–– For the purposes of this Chapter, ––
(i) a “Limited Liability Partnership” formed and registered under the provisions of the Limited
Liability Partnership A ct, 2008 (6 of 2009) shall also be considered as a firm;
(ii) “court” means the District Court, High Court or Supreme Court.
CHAPTER XVII
ADVANCE RULING
95. Definitions. –– In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, ––
(a) “advance ruling” me ans a decision provided by the Authority or the Appellate Authority
to an applicant on matters or on questions specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 97 or sub -section
(1) of section 100, in relation to the supply of goods or services or both being undertaken or
proposed to be undertaken by the applicant;
(b) “Appellate Authority” means the Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling constituted
under section 99;
(c) “applicant” means any person registered or desirous of obtaining registration under this
Act;
(d) “application” means an application made to the Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section
97;
(e) “Authority” means the Authority for Advance Ruling, const ituted under section 96.
96. Constitution of Authority for Advance Ruling. –– (1) The Government shall, by notification,
constitute an Authority to be known as the Maharashtra Authority for Advance Ruling:
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
Provided that the Government may, on the recommen dation of the Council, notify any Authority
located in another State to act as the Authority for the State.
(2) The Authority shall consist of —
(i) one member from amongst the officers of central tax; and
(ii) one member from amongst the officers of Sta te tax, to be appointed by the Central
Government and the State Government, respectively.
(3) The qualifications, the method of appointment of the members and the terms and conditions of
their services shall be such as may be prescribed.
97. Application for advance ruling. –– (1) An applicant desirous of obtaining an advance ruling
under this Chapter may make an application in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee as
may be prescribed, stating the question on which the advance ruling is sought.
(2) The question on which the advance ruling is sought under this Act, shall be in respect of, —
(a) classification of any goods or services or both;
(b) applicability of a notification issued under the provisions of this Act;
(c) determination of time and value of supply of goods or services or both;
(d) admissibility of input tax credit of tax paid or deemed to have been paid;
(e) determination of the liability to pay tax on any goods or services or both;
(f) whether applicant is required to be reg istered;
(g) whether any particular thing done by the applicant with respect to any goods or services
or both amounts to or results in a supply of goods or services or both, within the meaning of that
term.
98. Procedure on receipt of application. –– (1) On receipt of an application, the Authority shall
cause a copy thereof to be forwarded to the concerned officer and, if necessary, call upon him to furnish
the relevant records:
Provided that where any records have been called for by the Authority in an y case, such records
shall, as soon as possible, be returned to the said concerned officer.
(2) The Authority may, after examining the application and the records called for and after hearing
the applicant or his authorised representative and the concerne d officer or his authorised representative,
by order, either admit or reject the application:
Provided that the Authority shall not admit the application where the question raised in the
application is already pending or decided in any proceedings in the case of an applicant under any of the
provisions of this Act:
Provided further that no application shall be rejected under this sub -section unless an opportunity
of hearing has been given to the applicant:
Provided also that where the application is reje cted, the reasons for such rejection shall be specified
in the order.
(3) A copy of every order made under sub -section ( 2) shall be sent to the applicant and to the
concerned officer.
(4) Where an application is admitted under sub -section ( 2), the Author ity shall, after examining
such further material as may be placed before it by the applicant or obtained by the Authority and after
providing an opportunity of being heard to the applicant or his authorised representative as well as to the
concerned office r or his authorised representative, pronounce its advance ruling on the question specified
in the application.
(5) Where the members of the Authority differ on any question on which the advance ruling is
sought, they shall state the point or points on whic h they differ and make a reference to the Appellate
Authority for hearing and decision on such question.

(6) The Authority shall pronounce its advance ruling in writing within ninety days from the date of
receipt of application.
(7) A copy of the advance ruling pronounced by the Authority duly signed by the members and
certified in such manner as may be prescribed shall be sent to the applicant, the concerned officer and
the jurisdictional officer after such pronouncement.
99. Constitution of Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling. –– The Government shall, by
notification, constitute an Authority to be known as Maharashtra Appellate Authority for Advance
Ruling for Goods and Services Tax for hearing appeals against the advance ruling pronounced by the
Advance Ruling Authority consisting of, —
(i) the Chief Commissioner of central tax as designated by the Board; and
(ii) the Commissioner of State tax:
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify any Appellate
Authority l ocated in another State or Union territory to act as the Appellate Authority for the State.
100. Appeal to the Appellate Authority. –– (1) The concerned officer, the jurisdictional officer
or an applicant aggrieved by any advance ruling pronounced under s ub-section ( 4) of section 98, may
appeal to the Appellate Authority.
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be filed within a period of thirty days from the date on
which the ruling sought to be appealed against is communicated to the concerned officer , the
jurisdictional officer and the applicant:
Provided that the Appellate Authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by a
sufficient cause from presenting the appeal within the said period of thirty days, allow it to be presented
within a further period not exceeding thirty days.
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form, accompanied by such fee and verified in
such manner as may be prescribed.
101. Orders of Appellate Authority. –– (1) The Appellate Authority ma y, after giving the parties
to the appeal or reference an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it thinks fit, confirming or
modifying the ruling appealed against or referred to.
(2) The order referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be passed within a period of ninety days from the
date of filing of the appeal under section 100 or a reference under sub -section ( 5) of section 98.
(3) Where the members of the Appellate Authority differ on any point or points referred to in appeal
or reference, it shal l be deemed that no advance ruling can be issued in respect of the question under the
appeal or reference.
(4) A copy of the advance ruling pronounced by the Appellate Authority duly signed by the
Members and certified in such manner as may be prescribed shall be sent to the applicant, the concerned
officer, the jurisdictional officer and to the Authority after such pronouncement.
102. Rectification of advance ruling. –– The Authority or the Appellate Authority may amend
any order passed by it under section 98 or section 101, so as to rectify any error apparent on the face of
the record, if such error is noticed by the Authority or the Appellate Authority on its own accor d, or is
brought to its notice by the concerned officer, the jurisdictional officer, or the applicant or the appellant
within a period of six months from the date of the order:
Provided that no rectification which has the effect of enhancing the tax liabi lity or reducing the
amount of admissible input tax credit shall be made unless the applicant or the appellant has been given
an opportunity of being heard.
103. Applicability of advance ruling. –– (1) The advance ruling pronounced by the Authority or
the Appellate Authority under this Chapter shall be binding only —
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(a) on the applicant who had sought it in respect of any matter referred to in sub -section ( 2)
of section 97 for advance ruling;
(b) on the concerned officer or the jurisdictional officer in r espect of the applicant.
(2) The advance ruling referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be binding unless the law, facts or
circumstances supporting the original advance ruling have changed.
104. Advance ruling to be void in certain circumstances. –– (1) Whe re the Authority or the
Appellate Authority finds that advance ruling pronounced by it under sub -section ( 4) of section 98 or
under sub -section ( 1) of section 101 has been obtained by the applicant or the appellant by fraud or
suppression of material facts or misrepresentation of facts, it may, by order, declare such ruling to be
void ab-initio and thereupon all the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall apply to the
applicant or the appellant as if such advance ruling had never been made :
Provided that no order shall be passed under this sub -section unless an opportunity of being heard
has been given to the applicant or the appellant.
Explanation .–– The period beginning with the date of such advance ruling and ending with the date
of or der under this sub -section shall be excluded while computing the period specified in sub -sections
(2) and ( 10) of section 73 or sub -sections ( 2) and ( 10) of section 74 [or sub -sections ( 2) and ( 7) of
(2) A copy of the order made under sub-section ( 1) shall be sent to the applicant, the concerned
officer and the jurisdictional officer.
105. Powers of Authority and Appellate Authority. –– (1) The Authority or the Appellate
Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers regardi ng—
(a) discovery and inspection;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(c) issuing commissions and compelling production of books of account and other records,
have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).
(2) The Authority or the Appellate Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
1974) , and every proceedi ng before the Authority or the Appellate Authority shall be deemed to be a
judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) .
106. Procedure of Authority and Appellat e Authority. –– The Authority or the Appellate
Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to regulate its own procedure.
CHAPTER XVIII
APPEALS AND REVISION
107. Appeals to Appellate Authority. –– (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order
passed under this Act or the Central Goods and Services Tax Act by an adjudicating authority may appeal
to such Appellate Authority as may be prescribed within three months from the date on which the said
decision or order is communicated to such person.
(2) The Commissioner may, on his own motion, or upon request from the Commissioner of central
tax, call for and examine the record of any proceeding in which an adjudicating authority has passed any
decision or order under this Act or the Central Goods and S ervices Tax Act, for the purpose of satisfying
himself as to the legality or propriety of the said decision or order and may, by order, direct any officer
subordinate to him to apply to the Appellate Authority within six months from the date of communicati on

These words, brackets, figures and letter were added by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 30, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

of the said decision or order for the determination of such points arising out of the said decision or order
as may be specified by the Commissioner in his order.
(3) Where, in pursuance of an order under sub -section ( 2), the authorised officer makes an
application to the Appellate Authority, such application shall be dealt with by the Appellate Authority
as if it were an appeal made against the decision or order of the adjudicating authority and such authorised
officer were an appellant and the provisio ns of this Act relating to appeals shall apply to such application.
(4) The Appellate Authority may, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from presenting the appeal within the aforesaid period of three months or six mont hs, as the case
may be, allow it to be presented within a further period of one month.
(5) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form and shall be verified in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(6) No appeal shall be filed under sub -section ( 1), unless the appellant has paid —
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and penalty arising from the
impugned order, as is admitted by him ; and
(b) a sum equal to ten per cent. of the remaining amount of tax in dispute arising from the said
order, [subject to a maximum of [twenty crore ] rupees] in relation to which the appeal has been
filed.
[Provided that in case of any order demanding penalty without involving demand of any tax, no
appeal shall be filed against such orde r unless a sum equal to ten per cent. of the said penalty has been
paid by the appellant. ]
(7) Where the appellant has paid the amount under sub -section ( 6), the recovery proceedings for
the balance amount shall be deemed to be stayed.
(8) The Appellate Authority shall give an opportunity to the appellant of being heard.
(9) The Appellate Authority may, if sufficient cause is shown at any stage of hearing of an appeal,
grant time to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing of the appeal for rea sons to be recorded
in writing:
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party during hearing
of the appeal.
(10) The Appellate Authority may, at the time of hearing of an appeal, allow an appellant to add
any ground of appeal not specified in the grounds of appeal, if it is satisfied that the omission of that
ground from the grounds of appeal was not wilful or unreasonable.
(11) The Appellate Authority shall, after making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pas s
such order, as it thinks just and proper, confirming, modifying or annulling the decision or order appealed
against but shall not refer the case back to the adjudicating authority that passed the said decision or
order:
Provided that an order enhancing any fee or penalty or fine in lieu of confiscation or confiscating
goods of greater value or reducing the amount of refund or input tax credit shall not be passed unless the
appellant has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the pro posed order:
Provided further that where the Appellate Authority is of the opinion that any tax has not been paid
or short -paid or erroneously refunded, or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised, no
order requiring the appellant to pa y such tax or input tax credit shall be passed unless the appellant is
given notice to show cause against the proposed order and the order is passed within the time limit
specified under section 73 or section 74 [or section 74A] .

These words were inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 25, w.e.f . 1st February 2019.
This proviso was substituted by Mah. 39 of 2025, s. 10, w.e.f . 1st October 2025.
These words, figures and letter were added by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 31( 2), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(12) The order of the Ap pellate Authority disposing of the appeal shall be in writing and shall state
the points for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for such decision.
(13) The Appellate Authority shall, where it is possible to do so, hear and decide every app eal
within a period of one year from the date on which it is filed:
Provided that where the issuance of order is stayed by an order of a court or Tribunal, the period of
such stay shall be excluded in computing the period of one year.
(14) On disposal o f the appeal, the Appellate Authority shall communicate the order passed by it
to the appellant, respondent and to the adjudicating authority.
(15) A copy of the order passed by the Appellate Authority shall also be sent to the Commissioner
or the authori ty designated by him in this behalf and the jurisdictional Commissioner of Central tax or
an authority designated by him in this behalf.
(16) Every order passed under this section shall, subject to the provisions of section 108 or section
or section 117 or section 118 be final and binding on the parties.
108. Powers of Revisional Authority. –– (1) Subject to the provisions of section 121 and any rules
made thereunder, the Revisional Authority may, on his own motion, or upon information received by
him or on request from the Commissioner of central tax, call for and examine the record of any
procee dings, and if he considers that any decision or order passed under this Act or under the Central
Goods and Services Tax Act by any officer subordinate to him is erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial
to the interest of revenue and is illegal or improper or has not taken into account certain material facts,
whether available at the time of issuance of the said order or not or in consequence of an observation by
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, he may, if necessary, stay the operation of such d ecision
or order for such period as he deems fit and after giving the person concerned an opportunity of being
heard and after making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pass such order, as he thinks just and
proper, including enhancing or modifying or annulling the said decision or order.
(2) The Revisional Authority shall not exercise any power under sub -section ( 1), if––
(a) the order has been subject to an appeal under section 107 or section 112 or section 117 or
(b) the period specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 107 has not yet expired or more than
three years have expired after the passing of the decision or order sought to be revised; or
(c) the order has already been taken for revision under this section at an earlier stage; or
(d) the order has been passed in exercise of the powers under sub -section ( 1):
Provided that the Revisional Authority may pass an order under sub -section (1) on any point which
has not been raised and decided in an appeal referred to in clause (a) of sub -section ( 2), before the expiry
of a period of one year from the date of the order in such appeal or before the expiry of a period of three
years referred to in clause ( b) of that sub -section, whichever is later.
(3) Every order passed in revis ion under sub -section ( 1) shall, subject to the provisions of section
or section 117 or section 118, be final and binding on the parties.
(4) If the said decision or order involves an issue on which the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court
has given i ts decision in some other proceedings and an appeal to the High Court or the Supreme Court
against such decision of the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court is pending, the period spent between
the date of the decision of the Appellate Tribunal and the dat e of the decision of the High Court or the
date of the decision of the High Court and the date of the decision of the Supreme Court shall be excluded
in computing the period of limitation referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) where proceedings for
revision have been initiated by way of issue of a notice under this section.
(5) Where the issuance of an order under sub -section ( 1) is stayed by the order of a court or
Appellate Tribunal, the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the period of limitation
referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2).
(6) For the purposes of this section, the term, ––
(i) “record” shall include all records relating to any proceedings under this Act available at
the time of examination by the Revisional Authori ty;

(ii) “decision” shall include intimation given by any officer lower in rank than the Revisional
Authority.
[109. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal and Benches thereof. — Subject to the provisions of
this Chapter, the Goods and Services Tax Appellat e Tribunal constituted under the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act shall be the Appellate Tribunal for hearing appeals against the orders passed by the
Appellate Authority or the Revisional Authority [, or for conducting an examination or adjudicating th e
cases referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 171, if so notified under th e said section] under this Act.]
[* * *]
111. Procedure before Appellate Tribunal. — (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not, while
disposing of any proceedings before it or an appeal before it, be bound by the procedure laid down in th e
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ), but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and
subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Appellate Tr ibunal shall
have power to regulate its own procedure.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, have
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while
trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: —
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of
1872) requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or document from any
office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex-parte ;
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any order passed
by it ex-parte ; and
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Any or der made by the Appellate Tribunal may be enforced by it in the same manner as if it
were a decree made by a court in a suit pending therein, and it shall be lawful for the Appellate Tribunal
to send for execution of its orders to the court within the loca l limits of whose jurisdiction, —
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered office of the company is
situated; or
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, the person concerned voluntarily resides
or carries on business or personally works for gain.
(4) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within
the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860) , and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be civil court for the purposes of section
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
112. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal. — (1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed against him
under s ection 107 or section 108 of this Act or the Central Goods and Services Tax Act may appeal to
the Appellate Tribunal against such order within three months from the date on which the order sought
to be appealed against is communicated to the person preferr ing the appeal [; or the date, as may be
notified by the Government, on the recommendations of the Council, for filing appeal before the
Appellate Tribunal under this Act, whichever is later] .

These words were inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st August 2024 by Mah. 8 of
2025, s. 33( 1).
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, in its discretion, refuse to admit any such appeal where the tax or
input tax credit involved or the difference in tax or input tax credit involved or the amount of fine, fee or
penalty determined by such order, does not exceed fifty thousand rupees.
(3) The Commissioner may, on his own motion, or upon request from the Commissioner of central
tax, call for and examine the record of any order passed by the Appellate Authority or the Revisional
Authority under this Act or under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act for the purpose of s atisfying
himself as to the legality or propriety of the said order and may, by order, direct any officer subordinate
to him to apply to the Appellate Tribunal within six months from the date on which the said order has
been passed [; or the date, as may be notified by the Government, on the recommendations of the
Council, for the purpose of filing application before the Appellate Tribunal under this Act, whichever is
later,] for determination of such points arising out of the said order as may be specifie d by the
Commissioner in his order.
(4) Where in pursuance of an order under sub -section ( 3) the authorised officer makes an
application to the Appellate Tribunal, such application shall be dealt with by the Appellate Tribunal as
if it were an appeal made against the order under sub -section ( 11) of section 107 or under sub -section
(1) of section 108 and the provisions of this Act shall apply to such application, as they apply in relation
to appeals filed under sub -section ( 1).
(5) On receipt of notice tha t an appeal has been preferred under this section, the party against whom
the appeal has been preferred may, notwithstanding that he may not have appealed against such order or
any part thereof, file, within forty -five days of the receipt of notice, a memo randum of
cross -objections, verified in the prescribed manner, against any part of the order appealed against and
such memorandum shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal, as if it were an appeal presented
within the time specified in sub -section ( 1).
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal within three months after the expiry of the period
referred to in sub -section ( 1) [or permit the filing of an application within three months after the expiry
of the period referred to in sub -section ( 3)], or permit the filing of a memorandum of cross -objections
within forty -five days after the expiry of the period referred to in sub -section ( 5), if it is satisfied that
there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within that period.
(7) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in such form, verified in such manner and shall be
accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed.
(8) No appeal shall be filed under sub -section ( 1), unless the appellant has paid ––
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and penalty arising from the
impugned order, as is admitted by him, and
(b) a sum equal to [ten per cent.] of the remaining amount of tax in dispute, in addition to the
amount paid under sub -section ( 6) of the sect ion 107, arising from the said order, [subject to a
maximum of [twenty crore rupees ],] in relation to which the appeal has been filed :
[Provided that in case of any order demanding penalty without involving demand of any tax,
no appeal shall be filed against such order unless a sum equal to ten per cent. of the said penalty,
in addition to the amount payable under the proviso to sub -section ( 6) of section 107 has been paid
by the appellant.]
(9) Where the appellant has paid the amount as per sub-section ( 8), the recovery proceedings for
the balance amount shall be deemed to be stayed till the disposal of the appeal.
(10) Every application made before the Appellate Tribunal, —
(a) in an appeal for rectification of error or for any oth er purpose ; or

These words were inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st August 2024 by Mah. 8 of
2025, s. 33( 2).
These wo rds, brackets and figure were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 33( 3), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
These words were substituted for the words “twenty per cent.” by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 33( 4)(a), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
These words were inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 26.
These words were substituted for the words “fifty crore rupees” by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 33( 4)(b), w.e.f . 1st November 2024.

(b) for restoration of an appeal or an application, shall be accompanied by such fees as may
be prescribed.
113. Orders of Appellate Tribunal. –– (1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties
to the appeal an opportunity of being h eard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming,
modifying or annulling the decision or order appealed against or may refer the case back to the Appellate
Authority, or the Revisional Authority or to the original adjudicating authority, with su ch directions as
it may think fit, for a fresh adjudication or decision after taking additional evidence, if necessary.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, if sufficient cause is shown, at any stage of hearing of an appeal,
grant time to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing of the appeal for re asons to be recorded
in writing :
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party during hearing
of the appeal.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may amend any order passed by it under sub -section ( 1) so as to rectify
any error apparent on the face of the record, if such error is noticed by it on its own accord, or is brought
to its notice by the Commissioner or the Commissioner of central tax or the other party to the appeal
within a period of three mo nths from the date of the order :
Provided that no amendment which has the effect of enhancing an assessment or reducing a refund
or input tax credit or otherwise increasing the liability of the other party, shall be made under thi s
sub-section, unless the party has been given an opportunity of being heard.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall, as far as possible, hear and decide every appeal within a period
of one year from the date on which it is filed.
(5) The Appellate Tribunal s hall send a copy of every order passed under this section to the
Appellate Authority or the Revisional Authority, or the original adjudicating authority, as the case may
be, the appellant and the Commissioner or the jurisdictional Commissioner of central t ax.
(6) Save as provided in section 117 or section 118, orders passed by the Appellate Tribunal on an
appeal shall be final and binding on the parties.
[* * *]
115. Interest on refund of amount paid for admission of appeal. –– Where an amount paid by
the appellant under sub -section ( 6) of section 107 or sub -section ( 8) of section 112 is required to be
refunded consequent to any order of the Appellate Authority or of the Appellate Tribunal, interest at the
rate specified under section 56 shall be payable in respect of such refund from the date of payment of the
amount till the date of refund of such amount.
116. Appearance by authorised representative. –– (1) Any person who is entitled or required to
appear before an officer appointed under this Act, or t he Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal
in connection with any proceedings under this Act, may, otherwise than when required under this Act to
appear personally for examination on oath or affirmation, subject to the other provisions of this sectio n,
appear by an authorised representative.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the expression “authorised representative” shall mean a person
authorised by the person referred to in sub -section ( 1) to appear on his behalf, being —
(a) his relative or regula r employee ; or
(b) an advocate who is entitled to practice in any court in India, and who has not been debarred
from pract icing before any court in India ; or
(c) any chartered accountant, a cost accountant or a company secretary, who holds a certificate
of practice and who has not been debarred from practice ; or
(d) a retired officer of the Commercial Tax Department of any State Government or Union
territory or of the Board who, during his service under the Government, had worked in a post not
below the rank than that of a Group -B Gazetted officer for a pe riod of not less than two years :

The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
Provided that, such officer shall not be entitled to appear before any proceedings under this Act for
a period of one year from the date of his retirement or re signation ; or
(e) any person who has been authorised to act as a goods and services tax practitioner on
behalf of the concerned registered person.
(3) No person, —
(a) who has been dismissed or removed from Government service ; or
(b) who is convicted of an offence connected with any proceedings under this Act, the Central
Goods and Services Tax Act, the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory
Goods and Services Tax Act, or under the existing law or under any of the Acts passed by a State
Legislature dealing with the imposition of taxes on sale of goods or supp ly of goods or services or
both; or
(c) who is found guilty of miscond uct by the prescri bed authority ;
(d) who has been adjudged as an insolvent, shall be qualified to represent any person under
sub-section ( 1)––
(i) for all times in case of persons referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c); and
(ii) for the period during which the insolvenc y continues in the case of a person referred
to in clause ( d).
(4) Any person who has been disqualified under the provisions of the Central Goods and Services
Tax Act or the Goods and Services Tax Act of any other State or the Union Territory Goods and Se rvices
Tax Act shall be deemed to be disqualified under this Act.
117. Appeal to High Court. –– (1) Any person aggrieved by any order passed by the [State
Bench es] of the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court and the High Court may admi t
such appeal, if it is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law.
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of one hundred and eighty days
from the date on which the order appealed against is received by the aggrieved person and it shall be in
such form, verified in such manners may be presc ribed :
Provided that, the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period if it is
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it withi n such period.
(3) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any case, it
shall formulate that question and the appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated, and the
respondents shall, at the hearing o f the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such
question :
Provided that, nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the
court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substant ial question of law not
formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question.
(4) The High Court shall decide the question of law so formulated and deliver such judgment
thereon containing the grounds on which such decision is founded and may award such cost as it deems
fit.
(5) The High Court may determine any issue which ––
(a) has not been determined by the [State Benches ]; or
(b) has been wrongly determined by the [State Benches ], by reason of a decision on such
question of law as herein referred to in sub -section ( 3).

These words were substituted for the words “State Bench or Area Benches” by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 16( i), w.e.f . 1st August
2023.
These words were substituted for the words “State Bench or Area Benches” by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 16( ii), w.e.f .
1st August 2023.
These words were substituted for the words “State Bench or Area Benches” by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 16( iii), w.e.f .
1st August 2023.

(6) Where an appeal has been filed before the High Court, it shall be heard by a Bench of not less
than two Judges of the High Court, and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such Judges
or of the m ajority, if any, of such Judges.
(7) Where there is no such majority, the Judges shall state the point of law upon which they differ
and the case shall, then, be heard upon that point only, by one or more of the other Judges of the High
Court and such point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Judges who have
heard the case including those who first heard it.
(8) Where the High Court delivers a judgment in an appeal filed before it under this section, effect
shall be given to such judgment by either side on the b asis of a certified copy of the judgment.
(9) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(5 of 1908), relating to appeals to the High Court shall, as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals
under this section.
118. Appeal to Supreme Court. –– (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court ––
(a) from any order passed by the [Principal Bench] of the Appellate Tribunal ; or
(b) from any judgment or order passed by the High Court in an appeal made under se ction
in any case which, on its own motion or on an application made by or on behalf of the party
aggrieved, immediately after passing of the judgment or order, the High Court certifies to be a fit
one for appeal to the Supreme Court.
(2) The provisio ns of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) relating to appeals to the
Supreme Court shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of appeals under this section as they apply in
the case of appeals from decrees of a High Court.
(3) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed in the appeal, effect shall be given
to the order of the Supreme Court in the manner provided in section 117 in the case of a judgment of the
High Court.
119. Sums due to be paid notwithstanding appeal, etc. — Notw ithstanding that an appeal has
been preferred to the High Court or the Supreme Court, sums due to the Government as a result of an
order passed by the [Principal Bench] of the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) of section 113 or
an order passed by t he [State Benches ] of the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) of section 113
or an order passed by the High Court under section 117, as the case may be, shall be payable in
accordance with the order so passed.
120. Appeal not to be filed in certain cases.–– (1) The Commissioner may, on the
recommendations of the Council, from time to time, issue orders or instructions or directions fixing such
monetary limits, as he may deem fit, for the purposes of regulating the filing of appeal or application by
the officer of the State tax under the provisions of this Chapter.
(2) Where, in pursuance of the orders or instructions or directions issued under sub -section ( 1), the
officer of the State tax has not filed an appeal or application against any decision or order passed under
the provisions of this Act, it shall not preclude such officer of the State tax from filing appeal or
application in any other case involving the same or similar issues or questions of law.
(3) Notwithstanding the fact that no appeal o r application has been filed by the officer of the State
tax pursuant to the orders or instructions or directions issued under sub -section ( 1), no person, being a
party in appeal or application shall contend that the officer of the State tax has acquiesced in the decision
on the disputed issue by not filing an appeal or application.

These words were substituted for t he words “National Bench or Regional Benches” by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 17, w.e.f .
1st August 2023.
These words were substituted for the words “National Bench or Regional Benches” by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 18( a), w.e.f .
1st August 2023.
1st August 2023.

The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(4) The Appellate Tribunal or court hearing such appeal or application shall have regard to the
circumstances under which appeal or application was not filed by the officer of the State tax in pursuance
of the orders or instructions or directions issued under sub -section ( 1).
121. Non -appealable decisions and orders. –– Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any
provisions of this Act, no appeal shall lie against any decis ion taken or order passed by an officer of State
tax if such decision taken or order passed relates to any one or more of the following matters,
namely :—
(a) an order of the Commissioner or other authority empowered to direct transfer of
proceedings from one officer to another officer ; or
(b) an order pertaining to the seizure or retention of books of accoun t, register and other
documents ; or
(c) an order sanctio ning prosecution under this Act ; or
(d) an order passed under section 80.
CHAPTER XIX
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
122. Penalty certain offences. –– (1) Where a taxable person who ––
(i) supplies any goods or services or both without issue of any invoice or issues an incorrect
or false invoice with regard to any such supply ;
(ii) issues any inv oice or bill without supply of goods or services or both in violation of the
provisions of this A ct or the rules made thereunder ;
(iii) collects any amount as tax but fails to pay the same to the Government beyond a period
of three months from the date on which such payment becomes due ;
(iv) collects any tax in contravention of the provisions of this Act but fails to pay the same to
the Government beyond a period of three months from the date on which such payment becomes
due;
(v) fails to deduct the tax in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 51,
or deducts an amount which is less than the amount required to be deducted under the said
sub-section, or where he fails to pay to the Government under sub -section ( 2) ther eof, the amoun t
deducted as tax ;
(vi) fails to collect tax in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 52, or
collects an amount which is less than the amount required to be collected under the said
sub-section or where he fails to pay to the Gover nment the amount collected as tax under
sub-section ( 3) of section 52 ;
(vii) takes or utilizes input tax credit without actual receipt of goods or services or both either
fully or partially, in contravention of the provisions of this A ct or the rules mad e thereunder ;
(viii) fraudulently obtains refund of tax under this Act;
(ix) takes or distributes input tax credit in contravention of section 20, or the rules made
thereunder;
(x) falsifies or substitutes financial records or produces fake accounts or documents or
furnishes any false information or return with an intention to evade payment of tax due under this
Act;
(xi) is liable to be registered under this Act but fails to obtain registration;
(xii) furnishes any false information with regard to reg istration particulars, either at the time
of applying for registration, or subsequently;
(xiii) obstructs or prevents any officer in discharge of his duties under this Act;
(xiv) transports any taxable goods without the cover of documents as may be speci fied in this
behalf;
(xv) suppresses his turnover leading to evasion of tax under this Act;

(xvi) fails to keep, maintain or retain books of account and other documents in accordance
with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;
(xvii) fails to furnish information or documents called for by an officer in accordance with the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or furnishes false information or documents
during any proceedings under this Act;
(xviii) supplies, transports or stores any goods which he has reasons to believe are liable to
confiscation under this Act;
(xix) issues any invoice or document by using the registration number of another registered
person;
(xx) tampers with, or destroys any material evidence or docume nts;
(xxi) disposes off or tampers with any goods that have been detained, seized, or attached under
this Act, shall be liable to pay a penalty of ten thousand rupees or an amount equivalent to the tax
evaded or the tax not deducted under section 51 or short deduct ed or deducted but not paid to the
Government or tax not collected under section 52 or short collected or collected but not paid to the
Government or input tax credit availed of or passed on or distributed irregularly, or the refund
claimed fraudulently, w hichever is higher.
[(1A) Any person who retains the benefit of a transaction covered under clause ( i), (ii), (vii) or
clause ( ix) of sub -section ( 1) and at whose instance such transaction is conducted, shall be liable to a
penalty of an amount equivalen t to the tax evaded or input tax credit availed of or passed on.]
[(1B) Any electronic commerce operator [, who is liable to collect tax at source under section
52,]—
(i) allows a supply of goods or services or both through it by an unregistered person other
than a person exempted from registration by a notification issued under this Act to make such
supply;
(ii) allows an inter -State supply of goods or services or both through it by a person who is not
eligible to make such inter -State supply; or
(iii) fails to furnish the correct details in the statement to be furnished under sub -section ( 4)
of section 52 of any outward supply of goods effected through it by a person e xempted from
obtaining registration under this Act,
shall be liable to pay a penalty of ten thousand rupees, or an amount equivalent to the amount
of tax involved had such supply been made by a registered person other than a person paying tax
under s ectio n 10, whichever is higher.]
(2) Any registered person who supplies any goods or services or both on which any tax has not
been paid or short -paid or erroneously refunded, or where the input tax credit has been wrongly availed
or utilized, ––
(a) for any re ason, other than the reason of fraud or any willful misstatement or suppression
of facts to evade tax, shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees or ten per cent. of the tax
due from such person, whichever is higher;
(b) for reason of fraud or an y willful misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, shall
be liable to a penalty equal to ten thousand rupees or the tax due from such person, whichever is
higher.
(3) Any person who ––
(a) aids or abets any of the offences specified in clauses ( i) to ( xxi) of sub -section ( 1);
(b) acquires possession of, or in any way concerns himself in transporting, removing,
depositing, keeping, concealing, supplying, or purchasing or in any other manner deals with any

Sub-section ( 1A) was inserted by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 9.
Sub-section ( 1B) was inserted by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 19, w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
These words were substituted for the words “Any electronic Commerce operator who” and shall be deemed to have been
substituted with effect from the 1st October 2023, by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 34.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
goods which he knows or has reasons to be lieve are liable to confiscation under this Act or the rules
made thereunder;
(c) receives or is in any way concerned with the supply of, or in any other manner deals with
any supply of services which he knows or has reasons to believe are in contraventio n of any
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;
(d) fails to appear before the officer of State tax, when issued with a summon for appearance
to give evidence or produce a document in an inquiry;
(e) fails to issue invoice in accordance wit h the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder or fails to account for an invoice in his books of account,
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees.
[122A. Penalty for failure to register certain machines used in manufacture of goods as per
special procedure. — (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any person, who is
engaged in the manufacture of goods in respect of which any special procedure relating to registration
of machines has been notified under section 148, acts in contravention of the said special procedure, he
shall, in addition to any penalty that is paid or is payable by him under Chapter XV or any other
provisions of this Chapter, be liable to pay a penalty equal to an amount of one lakh rupees for every
machine not so registered.
(2) In addition to the penalty under sub -section ( 1), every machine not so registered shall be liab le
for seizure and confiscation :
Provided that, such machine shall not be confiscated where, —
(a) the penalty so imposed is paid; and
(b) the registration of such machine is made in accordance with the special procedure within
three days of the receipt of communi cation of the order of penalty.]
[122B. Penalty for failure to comply with track and tr ace mechanism. — Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, where any person referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section
148A acts in contravention of the provisions of the said section, he shall, in addition to any penalty under
Chapter XV or the provisions of this Chapter, be liable to pay a penalty equal to an amount of one lakh
rupees or ten per cent. of the tax payable on such goods, whichever is higher.]
123. Penalty for failure to furnish information return. –– If a person who is requ ired to furnish
an information return under section 150 fails to do so within the period specified in the notice issued
under sub -section ( 3) thereof, the proper officer may direct, that such person shall be liable to pay a
penalty of one hundred rupees for each day of the period during which the failure to furnish such return
continues:
Provided that the penalty imposed under this section sh all not exceed five thousand rupees.
124. Fine for failure to furnish statistics. –– If any person required to furnish any information or
return under section 151, —
(a) without reasonable cause fails to furnish such information or return as may be requir ed
under that section, or
(b) wilfully furnishes or causes to furnish any information or return which he knows to be
false, he shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and in case of a
continuing offence to a further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for each day after the
first day during which the offence continues subject to a maximum limit of twenty -five thousand
rupees.
125. General penalty. –– Any person, who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any
rules made thereunder for which no penalty is separately provided for in this Act, shall be liable to a
penalty which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees.

This section was inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 35, w.e.f . 1st October 2024.
This section was inserted by Mah. 39 of 2025, s. 12, w.e.f . 1st October 2025.

126. General disciplines related to penalty. –– (1) No officer under this Act shall impose any
penalty for minor breache s of tax regulations or procedural requirements and in particular, any omission
or mistake in documentation which is easily rectifiable and made without fraudulent intent or gross
negligence.
Explanation .–– For the purpose of this sub -section, ––
(a) a br each shall be considered a ‘minor breach’ if the amount of tax involved is less than
five thousand rupees;
(b) an omission or mistake in documentation shall be considered to be easily rectifiable if the
same is an error apparent on the face of record.
(2) The penalty imposed under this Act shall depend on the facts and circumstances of each case
and shall commensurate with the degree and severity of the breach.
(3) No penalty shall be imposed on any person without giving him an opportunity of being heard .
(4) The officer under this Act shall while imposing penalty in an order for a breach of any law,
regulation or procedural requirement, specify the nature of the breach and the applicable law, regulation
or procedure under which the amount of penalty for the breach has been specified.
(5) When a person voluntarily discloses to an officer under this Act the circumstances of a breach
of the tax law, regulation or procedural requirement prior to the discovery of the breach by the officer
under this Act, the proper officer may consider this fact as a mitigating factor when quantifying a penalty
for that person.
(6) The provisions of this section shall not apply in such cases where the penalty specified under
this Act is either a fixed sum or expressed as a f ixed percentage.
127. Power to impose penalty in certain cases. –– Where the proper officer is of the view that a
person is liable to a penalty and the same is not covered under any proceedings under section 62 or
may issue an order levying such penalty after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such
person.
128. Power to waive penalty or fee or both. –– The Government may, by notification , waive in
part or full, any penalty referred to in section 122 or section 123 or section 125 or any late fee referred
to in section 47 for such class of taxpayers and under such mitigating circumstances as may be specified
therein on the recommendations o f the Council.
[128A. Waiver of interest or penalty or both relating to demands raised under section 73 for
certain tax periods. — (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, where any
amount of tax is payable by a person chargeab le with tax in accordance with, —
(a) a notice issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 73 or a statement issued under sub -section
(3) of section 73, and where no order under sub -section ( 9) of section 73 has been issued; or
(b) an order passed under sub -section ( 9) of section 73, and where no order under sub -section
(11) of section 107 or sub -section ( 1) of section 108 has been passed; or
(c) an order passed under sub -section ( 11) of section 107 or sub -section ( 1) of section 108,
and where no order under sub-section ( 1) of section 113 has been passed,
pertaining to the period from 1st July 2017 to 31st March 2020, or a part thereof, and the said person
pays the full amount of tax payable as per the notice or statement or the order referred to in clause ( a),
clause ( b) or clause ( c), as the case may be, on or before the date, as may be notified by the Government
on the recommendations of the Council, no interest under section 50 and penalty under this Act, shall be
payable and all the proceedings in respect of the said notice or order or statement, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be concluded, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed:
Provided that, where a notice has been issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 74, and an order is
passed or re quired to be passed by the proper officer in pursuance of the direction of the Appellate
Authority or Appellate Tribunal or a court in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section

These words, figures and letter were inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 36, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
This section was inserted by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 37, w.e.f . 1st November 2024.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
75, the said notice or order shall be considered to be a not ice or order, as the case may be, referred to in
clause ( a) or clause ( b) of this sub -section:
Provided further that, the conclusion of the proceedings under this sub -section, in cases where an
application is filed under sub -section ( 3) of section 107 or under sub -section ( 3) of section 112 or an
appeal is filed by an officer of State tax under sub -section ( 1) of section 117 or under sub -section ( 1) of
referred to in clause ( b) or clause ( c) or against the directions of the Appellate Authority or the Appellate
Tribunal or the court referred to in the first proviso, shall be subject to the condition that the said person
pays the additional amount of tax payable, if any, in accordance with the order of the Appellate Authority
or the Appellate Tribunal or the court or the Revisional Authority, as the case may be, within three
months from the date of the said order:
Provided also that, where such interest a nd penalty has already been paid, no refund of the same
shall be available.
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall be applicable in respect of any amount payable by
the person on account of erroneous refund.
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall be applicable in respect of cases where an appeal or
writ petition filed by the said person is pending before Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or a
court, as the case may be, and has not been withdrawn by the said person on or before the date notified
under sub -section ( 1).
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any amount specified under sub -section
(1) has been paid and the proceedings are deemed to be concluded under the said sub -section, no appeal
under sub -section (1) of section 107 or sub -section ( 1) of section 112 shall lie against an order referred
to in clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), as the case may be.]
129. Detention, seizure and release of goods and conveyances in transit. –– (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, where any person transports any goods or stores any goods while they
are in transit in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, all such goods
and conveyance used as a means of transport for carrying the said goods and documents relating to such
goods and conveyance shall be liable to detention or seizure and after detention or seizure, shall be
released, —
[(a) on payment of penalty equal to two hundred per cent. of the tax payable on such goods
and, in case of exempted goods, on payment of an amount equal to two per cent. of the value of
goods or twenty -five thousand rupees, whichever is less, where the owner of the goods comes
forward for payment of such penalty;
(b) on p ayment of penalty equal to the fifty per cent. of the value of the goods or two hundred
per cent. of the tax payable on such goods, whichever is higher, and in case of exempted goods, on
payment of an amount equal to five per cent. of the value of goods or twenty -five thousand rupees,
whichever is less, where the owner of the goods does not come forward for payment of such
penalty;]
(c) upon furnishing a security equivalent to the amount payable under clause ( a) or clause ( b)
in such form and manner as ma y be prescribed:
Provided that no such goods or conveyance shall be detained or seized without serving an
order of detention or seizure on the person transporting the goods.
[* *]
[(3) The proper officer detaining or seizing goods or conveyance shall issue a notice within seven
days of such detention or seizure, specifying the penalty payable, and thereafter, pass an order within a
period of seven days from the date of service of such notice, for payment of penalty under clause ( a) or
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1).]

Clauses ( a) and ( b) were substituted by Mah. 13 of 2021, s. 12( i), w.e.f . 1st January 2022.
Sub-section ( 3) was substituted by Mah. 13 o f 2021, s. 12( iii), w.e.f . 1st January 2022.

(4) [No penalty] shall be determined under sub -section ( 3) without giving the person concerned an
opportunity of being heard.
(5) On payment of amount referred in sub -section ( 1), all proceedings in respect of the notice
specified in sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be concluded.
[(6) Where the person transporting any goods or the owner of such goods fails to pay the amount
of penalty under sub -section ( 1) within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the copy of the order
passed und er sub -section ( 3), the goods or conveyance so detained or seized shall be liable to be sold or
disposed of otherwise, in such manner and within such time, as may be prescribed, to recover the penalty
payable under sub -section ( 3):
Provided that the conve yance shall be released on payment by the transporter of penalty under sub section ( 3) or one lakh rupees, whichever is less:
Provided further that, where the detained or seized goods are perishable or hazardous in nature or
are likely to depreciate in value with passage of time, the said period of fifteen days may be reduced by
the proper officer.]
130. Confiscation of goods o r conveyances and levy of penalty. — (1) [Where] any person —
(i) supplies or receives any goods in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the
rules made thereunder with intent to evade payment of tax; or
(ii) does not account for any goods on which he is liable to pay tax under this Act; or
(iii) supplies any goods liable to tax under this Act without having applied for
registration; or
(iv) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder with intent to
evade payment of tax; or
(v) uses any conveyance as a means of transport for carriage of goods in contravention of the
provisions of this Act or the rules made the reunder unless the owner of the conveyance proves that
it was so used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the
person in charge of the conveyance,
then, all such goods or conveyances shall be liable to confiscat ion and the person shall be
liable to penalty under section 122.
(2) Whenever confiscation of any goods or conveyance is authorised by this Act, the officer
adjudging it shall give to the owner of the goods an option to pay in lieu of confiscation, such f ine as the
said officer thinks fit:
Provided that such fine leviable shall not exceed the market value of the goods confiscated, less the
tax chargeable thereon:
Provided further that the aggregate of such fine and penalty leviable shall not be less than the
[penalty equal to hundred per cent. of the tax payable on such goods:]
Provided also that where any such conveyance is used for the carriage of the goods or passengers
for hire, the owner of the conveyance shall be given an option to pay in lieu of the confiscation of the
conveyance a fine equal to the tax payable on the goods being transported thereon.
[* *]
(4) No order for confiscation of goods or conveyance or for imposition of penalty shall be issued
without giving the person an opportunity of being heard.

These words were substituted for the words “No tax, interest or penalty” by Mah. 13 of 2021, s. 12( iv), w.e.f . 1st January
2022.
This word was substituted for the words “Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if” by Mah. 13 of 2021,
These words were substituted for the words, brackets and figures “amount of penalty le viable under sub -section ( 1) of
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(5) Where any goods or conveyance are confiscated under this Act, the title of such goods or
conveyance shall thereupon vest in the Government.
(6) The proper officer adjudging confiscation shall take and hold possession of the things
confiscated and every officer of Police, on the requisition of such proper officer, shall assist him in taking
and holding such possession.
(7) The proper officer may, after satisfying himself that the confiscated goods or conveyance are
not required in any other proceedings under this Act and after giving reasonable time not exceeding three
months to pay fine in lieu of confiscation, dispose of such goods or conveyance and deposit the sale
proceeds thereof with the Government.
131. Confiscation or penalty not to interfere with other punishments. — Without prejudice to
the provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no confiscation made or
penalty imposed under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall prevent the infliction
of any other punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable under the provisions of this Act
or under any other law for the time being in force.
132. Punishment for certain offences. — (1) [Whoever commits, or causes to commit and retain
the benefits arising out of, any of the following offences], namely: —
(a) supplies any goods or services or both without issue of any invoice, in violation of the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, with the intention to evade tax;
(b) issues any invoice or bill without supply of goods or services or both in violation of the
provisions of this Act, or the rules made thereunder leading to wrongful availment or utilisation of
input tax credit or refund of tax;
[(c) avails input tax credit using the invoice or bill referred to in clause ( b) or fraudulently
avails input tax credit without any invoice or bill;]
(d) collects any amount as tax but fails to pay the same to the Government beyond a period
of three months from the date on which such payment becomes due;
(e) evades tax [* * *] or fraudulently obtains refund and where such offence is not covered
under clauses ( a) to ( d);
(f) falsifies or substitutes financial records or produces fake accounts or documents or
furnishes any false information with an intention to evade payment of tax due under this Act;
[* * *]
(h) acquires possession of, or in any way concerns himself in transporting, removing,
depositing, keeping, concealing, supplying, purchasing or in any other manner deals with, any
goods which he knows or has reasons to believe are liable to confiscation unde r this Act or the rules
made thereunder;
(i) receives or is in any way concerned with the supply of, or in any other manner deals with
any supply of services which he knows or has reasons to believe are in contravention of any
provisions of this Act or th e rules made thereunder;
[* * *]
(l) attempts to commit, or abets the commission of any of the offences mentioned in [clauses
(a) to ( f) and clauses ( h) and ( i)] of this section, shall be punishable ––

These words were substituted for the words “Whoever commits any of the following offenses” by Mah. 23 of 2020,
s. 10( i).
Clause ( c) was substituted by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 10( ii).
These words, brackets and letters were substituted for the words, brackets and letters “clauses ( a) to ( k)” by Mah. 32 of
2023, s. 20( b), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.

(i) in cases where the amount of tax evaded or the amount of input tax credit wrongly
availed or utilised or the amount of refund wrongly taken exceeds five hundred lakh rupees,
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine;
(ii) in cases where the amount of tax evaded or the amount of input tax credit wrongly
availed or utilised or the amount of refund wrongly taken exceeds two hundred lakh rupees
but does not exceed five hundred lakh rupees, with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years and with fine;
(iii) in the case of [an offence specified in clause ( b),] where the amount of tax evaded
or the amount of input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised or the amount of refund wrongly
taken exceeds one hundred lakh rupees but does not exceed two hundred lakh rupe es, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine;
(iv) in cases where he commits or abets the commission of an offence specified in clause
(f) [* * *] , he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with fine or with both.
(2) Where any person convicted of an offence under this section is again convicted of an
offence under this section, then, he shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent
offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine.
(3) The imprisonment referred to in clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section
(2) shall, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be recorded in the
judgment of the Court, be for a term not less tha n six months.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(2 of 1974), all offences under this Act, except the offences referred to in sub -section ( 5) shall be
non-cognizable and bailable.
(5) The offences specified i n clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section
(1) and punishable under clause ( i) of that sub -section shall be cognizable and non -bailable.
(6) A person shall not be prosecuted for any offence under this section except with the
previous sanction of the Commissioner.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this section, the term “tax” shall include the amount of
tax evaded or the amount of input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised or refund wrongly taken
under the provisions of this Ac t, the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, the Integrated Goods and
Services Tax Act, and cess levied under the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act.
133. Liability of officers and certain other persons. — (1) Where any person engaged in
connection with the collection of statistics under section 151 or compilation or computerisation thereof
or if any officer of State tax having access to information specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 150,
or if any person engaged in connection with th e provision of service on the common portal or the agent
of common portal, wilfully discloses any information or the contents of any return furnished under this
Act or rules made thereunder otherwise than in execution of his duties under the said sections or for the
purposes of prosecution for an offence under this Act or under any other Act for the time being in force,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which
may extend to twenty five thousand ru pees, or with both.
(2) Any person —
(a) who is a Government servant shall not be prosecuted for any offence under this section
except with the previous sanction of the Government;
(b) who is not a Government servant shall not be prosecuted for any offence under this section
except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner.

These words, brackets and letter were substituted for the words “any other offence” by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 20( c), w.e.f .
1st October 2023.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
134. Cognizance of offences. — No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under
this Act or the rules made thereunder except with the previous sanction of the C ommissioner, and no
court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the First Class, shall try any such offence.
135. Presumption of culpable mental state. — In any prosecution for an offence under this Act
which requires a culpable mental state on the part of th e accused, the court shall presume the existence
of such mental state but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental
state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.
Explanation. — For the pur poses of this section, —
(i) the expression “culpable mental state” includes intention, motive, knowledge of a fact, and
belief in, or reason to believe, a fact;
(ii) a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes it to exist beyond reasonable d oubt
and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of probability.
136. Relevancy of statements under certain circumstances. — A statement made and signed by
a person on appearance in response to any summons issued under section 70 during the course of any
inquiry or proceedings under this Act shall be relevant, for the purpose of proving, in any prosecution
for an offence under t his Act, the truth of the facts which it contains, —
(a) when the person who made the statement is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of
giving evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or whose presence cannot be
obtained without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the
court considers unreasonable; or
(b) when the person who made the statement is examined as a witness in the case before the
court and the court is of the opinion that, having regar d to the circumstances of the case, the
statement should be admitted in evidence in the interest of justice.
137. Offences by Companies. — (1) Where an offence committed by a person under this Act is a
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(2) Notw ithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(3) Where an offenc e under this Act has been committed by a taxable person being a partnership
firm or a Limited Liability Partnership or a Hindu Undivided Family or a trust, the partner or karta or
managing trustee shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be l iable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly and the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall mutatis mutandis apply to
such persons.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided
in this Act, i f he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
Explanation .–– For the purposes of this section, —
(i) “company” means a body corporate and includes a f irm or other association of individuals;
and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
138. Compounding of offences. — (1) Any offence under this Act may, either before or after the
institution of prosecution, be compounded by the Commissioner on payment, by the person accused of
the offence, to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, of such
comp ounding amount in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to —

[(a) a person who has been allowed to compound once in respect of any of the offences
specified in clauses ( a) to ( f), (h), (i) and ( l) of sub -section ( 1) of section 132 ;]
[***]
[(c) a person who has been accused of committing an offence under clause ( b) of sub -section
(1) of section 132 ;]
(d) a person who has been convicted for an offence under this Act by a court;
[* * *]
(f) any o ther class of persons or offences as may be prescribed:
Provided further that any compounding allowed under the provisions of this section shall not affect
the proceedings, if any, instituted under any other law:
Provided also that compounding shall be al lowed only after making payment of tax, interest and
penalty involved in such offences.
(2) The amount for compounding of offences under this section shall be such as may be prescribed,
subject to the minimum amount not being less than [twenty -five per ce nt. of the tax involved and the
maximum amount not being more than one hundred per cent. of the tax involved] .
(3) On payment of such compounding amount as may be determined by the Commissioner, no
further proceedings shall be initiated under this Act aga inst the accused person in respect of the same
offence and any criminal proceedings, if already initiated in respect of the said offence, shall
stand abated.
CHAPTER XX
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
139. Migration of existing tax payers. — (1) On and from the appointed day, every person
registered under any of the existing laws and having a valid Permanent Account Number shall be issued
a certificate of registration on provisional basis, subject to such conditions and in such form and manner
as may be prescribed, which unless replaced by a final certificate of registration under
sub-section ( 2), shall be liable to be cancelled if the conditions so prescribed are not complied with.
(2) The final certificate of registration shall be granted in such form and manner and subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed.
(3) The certificate of registration issued to a person under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to have
not been issued if the said registration is cancelled in pursuance of an application filed by such person
that he was not liable to registration under section 22 or section 24.
140. Transitional arrangements for input tax credit. — (1) A registered person, other than a
person opting to pay tax under section 10, shall be entitle d to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit
of the amount of Value Added Tax, and Entry Tax, if any, carried forward in the return relating to the
period ending with the day immediately preceding the appointed day, furnished by him under the existin g
law [within such time and] in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit in the following
circumstances, namely: —
(i) where the said amount of credit is not admissible as input tax credit u nder this Act; or

Clause ( a) was substituted by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 21( a)(i), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
Clause ( c) was substituted by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 21( a)(iii), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
These words were substituted for the words “ten thousand rupees or fifty per cent. of the tax involved, whichever is higher,
and the maximum amount not being less than thirty thousand rupees or one hundred and fifty per cent. of the tax, whichever
is higher” by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 21( b), w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
These words were inserted and should be deemed to have been inserte d w.e.f . 1st July 2017 by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 11( a).
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(ii) where he has not furnished all the returns required under the existing law for the period of
six months immediately preceding the appointed date; or
(iii) where the said amount of credit relates to units not entitled to claim set -off under rule 79
of the Maharashtra Value Added Tax Rules, 2005:
Provided further that so much of the said credit as is attributable to any claim related to section 3,
sub-section ( 3) of section 5, section 6, section 6A or sub -section ( 8) of section 8 of the Central Sales Tax
Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) which is not substantiated in the manner, and within the period, prescribed in rule
of the Central Sales Tax (Registration and Turnover) Rules, 1957 shall not be eligible to be credited
to the electronic cred it ledger:
Provided also that an amount equivalent to the credit specified in the second proviso shall be
refunded under the existing law when the said claims are substantiated in the manner prescribed in rule
of the Central Sales Tax (Registration and Turnover) Rules, 1957.
(2) A registered person, other than a person opting to pay tax under section 10, shall be entitled to
take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of the unavailed input tax credit in respect of capital goods,
not carried forward in a return, furnished under the existing law by him, for the period ending with the
day immediately preceding the appointed day [within such time and] in such manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit unless the said credit was
admissible as input tax credit under the existing law and is also admissible as input tax credit under
this Act.
Explanation .–– For the purposes of this section, the expression “unavailed input tax credit” means
the amou nt that remains after subtracting the amount of input tax credit already availed in respect of
capital goods by the taxable person under the existing law from the aggregate amount of input tax credit
to which the said person was entitled in respect of the said capital goods under the existing law.
(3) A registered person, who was not liable to be registered under the existing law or who was
engaged in the sale of exempted goods or tax free goods, by whatever name called, or goods which have
suffered tax at the first point of their sale in the State and the subsequent sales of which are not subject
to tax in the State under the existing law but which are liable to tax under this Act or where the person
was entitled to the credit of input tax at the time of s ale of goods, if any, shall be entitled to take, in his
electronic credit ledger, credit of the value added tax and entry tax in respect of inputs held in stock and
inputs contained in semi -finished or finished [goods held in stock on the appointed day, w ithin such
time and in such manner as may be prescribed, subject to] the following conditions, namely: ––
(i) such inputs or goods are used or intended to be used for making taxable supplies under this
Act;
(ii) the said registered person is eligible for input tax credit on such inputs under this Act;
(iii) the said registered person is in possession of invoice or other prescribed documents
evidencing payment of tax under the existing law in respect of such inputs; and
(iv) such invoices or other prescri bed documents were issued not earlier than twelve months
immediately preceding the appointed day:
Provided that where a registered person, other than a manufacturer or a supplier of services, is not
in possession of an invoice or any other documents evide ncing payment of tax in respect of inputs, then,
such registered person shall, subject to such conditions, limitations and safeguards as may be prescribed,
including that the said taxable person shall pass on the benefit of such credit by way of reduced pr ices to
the recipient, be allowed to take credit at such rate and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) A registered person, who was engaged in the sale of taxable goods as well as exempted goods
or tax free goods, by whatever name called, under the ex isting law but which are liable to tax under this
Act, shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, —

These words were inserted and should be deemed to have been inserted w.e.f . 1st July 2017 by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 11( b).
These words were substituted and should be deemed to have been substituted w.e.f . 1st July 2017 for the words “goods
held in stock on the appointed day subject to” by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 11( c).

(a) the amount of credit of the value added tax and entry tax, if any, carried forward in a return
furnished under the existing law by him in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1); and
(b) the amount of credit of the value added tax and entry tax, if any, in respect of inputs held
in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock on the appointed day,
relating to such exempted goods or tax free goods, by whatever name called, in accordance with
the provisions of sub -section ( 3).
(5) A registered person shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of value added
tax and entry tax, if any, in respect of inputs received on or after the appointed day but the tax in respect
of which has been paid by the supplier under the [existing law, within such time and in such manner as
may be prescribed] subject to the condition that the invoice or any other tax paying document of the
same was recorded in the books of account of such person within a period of thirty days from the
appointed day:
Provided that the period of thirty days may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the
Commis sioner for a further period not exceeding thirty days:
Provided further that the said registered person shall furnish a statement, in such manner as may be
prescribed, in respect of credit that has been taken under this sub -section.
(6) A registered pers on, who was either paying tax at a fixed rate or paying a fixed amount in lieu
of the tax payable under the existing law shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of
value added tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs con tained in semi -finished or finished
[goods held in stock on the appointed day, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed,
subject to] the following conditions, namely: ––
(i) such inputs or goods are used or intended to be used for making ta xable supplies under
this Act;
(ii) the said registered person is not paying tax under section 10;
(iii) the said registered person is eligible for input tax credit on such inputs under this Act;
(iv) the said registered person is in possession of invoi ce or other prescribed documents
evidencing payment of tax under the existing law in respect of inputs; and
(v) such invoices or other prescribed documents were issued not earlier than twelve months
immediately preceding the appointed day.
(7) The amount of credit under sub -sections ( 3), (4) and ( 6) shall be calculated in such manner as
may be prescribed.
141. Transitional provisions relating to jobwork .— (1) Where any inputs received at a place of
business had been despatched as such or despatched after being partially processed to a jobworker for
further processing, testing, repair, reconditioning or any other purpose in accordance with the provisions
of existing law prior to the appointed day and such inputs are returned to the said place on or after t he
appointed day, no tax shall be payable if such inputs, after completion of the jobwork or otherwise, are
returned to the said place within six months from the appointed day:
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, b e extended by the
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:
Provided further that if such inputs are not returned within the period specified in this sub -section,
the input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with th e provisions of clause ( a) of
sub-section ( 8) of section 142.
(2) Where any semi -finished goods had been despatched from the place of business to any other
premises for carrying out certain manufacturing processes in accordance with the provisions of existing
law prior to the appointed day and such goods (hereafter in this sub -section referred to as “the said
goods”) are returned to the said place on or after the appointed day, no tax shall be payable if the said

law” by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 11( d).
held in stock on the appointed day subject to” by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 11( e).
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
goods, after undergoing manufacturing processes or otherwise, are returned to the said place within six
mont hs from the appointed day:
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:
Provided further that if the said goods are not returned within a period specified in this sub -section,
the input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of
sub-section ( 8) of section 142:
Provided also that the person despatching the goods may, in accordance with the provisi ons of the
existing law, transfer the said goods to the premises of any registered person for the purpose of supplying
therefrom on payment of tax in India or without payment of tax for exports within the period specified
in this sub -section.
(3) Where any goods had been despatched from the place of business without payment of tax for
carrying out tests or any other process, to any other premises, whether registered or not, in accordance
with the provisions of existing law prior to the appointed day and suc h goods, are returned to the said
place of business on or after the appointed day, no tax shall be payable if the said goods, after undergoing
tests or any other process, are returned to such place within six months from the appointed day:
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:
Provided further that if the said goods are not returned within the period specified in this
sub-section, the input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of clause
(a) of sub -section ( 8) of section 142:
Provided also that the person despatching the goods may, in accordance with the provisions of the
existing law, transfer the said goods from the said other premises on payment of tax in India or without
payment of tax for exports within the period specified in this sub -section.
(4) The tax under sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall not be payable, only if the person despatching
the goods and the job worker declare the details of the inputs or goods held in stock by the job worker
on behalf of the said person on the appointed day in such form and manner and within such time as may
be prescribed.
142. Miscellaneous tra nsitional provisions. –– (1) Where any goods on which tax, if any, had
been paid under the existing law at the time of sale thereof, not being earlier than six months prior to the
appointed day, are returned to any place of business on or after the appointe d day, the registered person
shall be eligible for refund of the tax paid under the existing law where such goods are returned by a
person, other than a registered person, to the said place of business within a period of six months from
the appointed day a nd such goods are identifiable to the satisfaction of the proper officer:
Provided that if the said goods are returned by a registered person, the return of such goods shall
be deemed to be a supply.
(2) (a) where, in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day, the price of any
goods is revised upwards on or after the appointed day, the registered person who had sold such goods
shall issue to the recipient a supplementary invoice or debit note, containing such particulars as may be
prescribed, within thirty days of such price revision and for the purposes of this Act, such supplementary
invoice or debit note shall be deemed to have been issued in respect of an outward supply made under
this Act;
(b) where, in pursuance of a contract en tered into prior to the appointed day, the price of any
goods is revised downwards on or after the appointed day, the registered person who had sold such
goods may issue to the recipient a credit note, containing such particulars as may be prescribed,
within thirty days of such price revision and for the purposes of this Act such credit note shall be
deemed to have been issued in respect of an outward supply made under this Act:
Provided that the registered person shall be allowed to reduce his tax liabilit y on account of issue
of the credit note only if the recipient of the credit note has reduced his input tax credit corresponding to
such reduction of tax liability.

(3) Every claim for refund filed by any person before, on or after the appointed day for r efund of
any amount of input tax credit, tax, interest or any other amount paid under the existing law, shall be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of existing law and any amount eventually accruing to him
shall be refunded to him in cash in acc ordance with the provisions of the said law:
Provided that where any claim for refund of the amount of input tax credit is fully or partially
rejected, the amount so rejected shall lapse:
Provided further that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of input tax credit where the balance
of the said amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act.
(4) Every claim for refund filed after the appointed day for refund of any tax paid under the existing
law in respect of the goods expor ted before or after the appointed day, shall be disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of the existing law:
Provided that where any claim for refund of input tax credit is fully or partially rejected, the amount
so rejected shall lapse:
Provided f urther that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of input tax credit where the balance
of the said amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act.
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, any amount o f input tax credit
reversed prior to the appointed day shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.
(6) (a) every proceeding of appeal, revision, review or reference relating to a claim for input tax
credit initiated whether before, on or a fter the appointed day under the existing law shall be disposed of
in accordance with the provisions of the existing law, and any amount of credit found to be admissible
to the claimant shall be refunded to him in cash in accordance with the provisions of the existing law,
and the amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act:
Provided that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of input tax credit where the balance of the
said amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act;
(b) every proceeding of appeal, revision, review or reference relating to recovery of input tax
credit initiated whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law shall be
disposed of in accordance with t he provisions of the existing law, and if any amount of credit
becomes recoverable as a result of such appeal, revision, review or reference, the same shall, unless
recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an arrear of tax under this Act and the a mount so
recovered shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.
(7) (a) every proceeding of appeal, revision, review or reference relating to any output tax liability
initiated whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existin g law, shall be disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of the existing law, and if any amount becomes recoverable as a result of
such appeal, revision, review or reference, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be
recovered as an arrear of tax under this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input
tax credit under this Act.
(b) every proceeding of appeal, revision, review or reference relating to any output tax liability
initiated whether before, on or after t he appointed day under the existing law, shall be disposed of
in accordance with the provisions of the existing law, and any amount found to be admissible to
the claimant shall be refunded to him in cash in accordance with the provisions of the existing la w
and the amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.
(8) (a) where in pursuance of an assessment or adjudication proceedings instituted, whether before,
on or after the appointed day under the existing law, any amount of tax, interest, fine or penalty becomes
recoverable from the person, the same shall, unless rec overed under the existing law, be recovered as an
arrear of tax under this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input tax credit under
this Act;
(b) where in pursuance of an assessment or adjudication proceedings instituted, whether
before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law, any amount of tax, interest, fine or
penalty becomes refundable to the taxable person, the same shall be refunded to him in cash under
the said law, and the amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this
Act.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(9) (a) where any return, furnished under the existing law, is revised after the appointed day and if,
pursuant to such revision, any amount is found to be recoverable or any amount of input tax credit is
found to be inadmissible, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an
arrear of tax under this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input tax credit under
this Act;
(b) where any return, furnished under the existing law, is revised after the appointed day but
within the time limit specified for such revision under the existing law and if, pursuant to such
revision, any amount is found to be refundable or input tax credit is found to be admissible to any
taxable person, the same shall be refunded to him in cash under the existing law, and the amount
rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.
(10) Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the goods or services or both su pplied on or after
the appointed day in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day shall be liable to tax
under the provisions of this Act.
(11) (a) notwithstanding anything contained in section 12, no tax shall be payable on goods un der
this Act to the extent the tax was leviable on the said goods under the Maharashtra Value Added Tax
Act, 2002 (Mah. IX of 2005);
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in section 13, no tax shall be payable on services
under this Act to the extent the tax was leviable on the said services under Chapter V of the Finance
Act, 1994 (32 of 1994);
(c) where tax was paid on any supply, both under the Maharashtra Value Added Tax Act,
(Mah. IX of 2005) and under Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1 994), tax shall be
leviable under this Act and the taxable person shall be entitled to take credit of value added tax or
service tax paid under the existing law to the extent of supplies made after the appointed day and
such credit shall be calculated in s uch manner as may be prescribed.
(12) Where any goods sent on approval basis, not earlier than six months before the appointed day,
are rejected or not approved by the buyer and returned to the seller on or after the appointed day, no tax
shall be payable thereon if such goods are returned within six months from the appointed day:
Provided that the said period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by
the Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:
Provided furthe r that the tax shall be payable by the person returning the goods if such goods are
liable to tax under this Act, and are returned after the period specified in this sub -section:
Provided also that tax shall be payable by the person who has sent the goods on approval basis if
such goods are liable to tax under this Act, and are not returned within the period specified in this
sub-section.
(13) Where a supplier has made any sale of goods in respect of which tax was required to be
deducted at source under the Maharashtra Value Added Tax Act, 2002 (Mah. IX of 2005) and has also
issued an invoice for the same before the appointed day, no deduction of tax at source under section 51
shall be made by the deductor under the said section where payment to the said supplier is made on or
after the appointed day.
(14) Where any goods or capital goods belonging to the principal are lying at the premises of the
agent on the appointed day, the agent shall be entitled to take credit of the tax paid on such goods or
capit al goods subject to fulfilment of the following conditions: —
(i) the agent is a registered taxable person under this Act;
(ii) both the principal and the agent declare the details of stock of goods or capital goods lying
with such agent on the day immedi ately preceding the appointed day in such form and manner and
within such time as may be prescribed in this behalf;
(iii) the invoices for such goods or capital goods had been issued not earlier than twelve
months immediately preceding the appointed day; and

(iv) the principal has either reversed or not availed of the input tax credit in respect
of such, —
(a) goods; or
(b) capital goods or, having availed of such credit, has reversed the said credit, to the
extent availed of by him.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression “capital goods” shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it in the Maharashtra Value Added Tax Act, 2002 (Mah. IX of 2005).
CHAPTER XXI
MISCELLANEOUS
143. Jobwork procedure. –– (1) A registered person (hereafter in this section referred to as the
“principal”) may, under intimation and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, send any inputs
or capital goods, without payment of tax, to a jobworker for jobwork and from there subsequently send
to another jobworker and likewise, and shall, ––
(a) bring back inputs, after completion of jobwork or otherwise, or capital goods, other than
moulds and dies, jigs and fixtures, or tools, within one year and three years, respectively, of their
being sent out, to any of his place of business, without payment of tax;
(b) supply such inputs, after completion of jobwork or otherwise, or capital goods, other than
moulds and dies, jigs and fixtures, or tools, within one year and three years, respectively, of their
being sent out from the place of business of a jobworker on payment of tax within India, or with or
without payment of tax for export, as the case may be:
Provided that the principal shall not supply the goods from the place of business of a jobworker in
accordance with the provisions of this clause unless the said principal declares the place of business of
the jobworker as his additional place of business except in a case —
(i) where the jobworker is registered under section 25; or
(ii) where the principa l is engaged in the supply of such goods as may be notified by the
Commissioner :
[Provided further that, the period of one year and three years may, on sufficient cause being
shown, be extended by the Commissioner for a further period not exceeding one ye ar and two years
respectively.]
(2) The responsibility for keeping proper accounts for the inputs or capital goods shall lie with the
principal.
(3) Where the inputs sent for jobwork are not received back by the principal after completion of
jobwork or ot herwise in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or are not supplied
from the place of business of the jobworker in accordance with the provisions of clause ( b) of sub -section
(1) within a period of one year of their being sent ou t, it shall be deemed that such inputs had been
supplied by the principal to the jobworker on the day when the said inputs were sent out.
(4) Where the capital goods, other than moulds and dies, jigs and fixtures, or tools, sent for jobwork
are not receive d back by the principal in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of
sub-section ( 1) or are not supplied from the place of business of the jobworker in accordance with the
provisions of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) within a period of three years of their being sent out, it shall
be deemed that such capital goods had been supplied by the principal to the jobworker on the day when
the said capital goods were sent out.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), any waste and s crap generated
during the jobwork may be supplied by the jobworker directly from his place of business on payment of
tax, if such jobworker is registered, or by the principal, if the jobworker is not registered.

This proviso was inserted by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 28.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
Explanation .— For the purposes of jobwork, i nput includes intermediate goods arising from any
treatment or process carried out on the inputs by the principal or the jobworker.
144. Presumption as to documents in certain cases. — Where any document —
(i) is produced by any person under this Act or any other law for the time being in force; or
(ii) has been seized from the custody or control of any person under this Act or any other law
for the time being in force; or
(iii) has been received from any place outside India in the course of any proceedings under
this Act or any other law for the time being in force,
and such document is tendered by the prosecution in evidence against him or any other person
who is tried jointly with him, the court shall —
(a) unless the contrary is proved by such person, presume —
(i) the truth of the contents of such document;
(ii) that the signature and every other part of such document which purports to be
in the handwriting of any particular person or which the court may reasonably assume
to have been signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, is in that
person’s handwriting, and in the case of a document executed or attested, that it was
executed or attested by the person by whom it purports to hav e been so executed or
attested;
(b) admit the document in evidence notwithstanding that it is not duly stamped, if such
document is otherwise admissible in evidence.
145. Admissibility of micro films, facsimile copies of documents and computer printouts a s
documents and as evidence. — (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other l aw for the time
being in force, —
(a) a micro film of a document or the reproduction of the image or images embodied in such
micro film (whether enlarged or not); or
(b) a facsimile copy of a document; or
(c) a statement contained in a document and included in a printed material produced by a
computer, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; or
(d) any information stored electronically in any device or media, inclu ding any hard copies
made of such information,
shall be deemed to be a document for the purposes of this Act and the rules made thereunder and
shall be admissible in any proceedings thereunder, without further proof or production of the original, as
eviden ce of any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be
admissible.
(2) In any proceedings under this Act or the rules made thereunder, where it is desired to give a
statement in evidence by virtue of this sectio n, a certificate, —
(a) identifying the document containing the statement and describing the manner in which it
was produced;
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that document as may
be appropriate for the purpose of showing that the document was produced by a computer, shall be
evidence of any matter stated in the certificate and for the purpose s of this sub -section it shall be
sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person
stating it.
146. Common Portal. — The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify
the Common Goods and Services Tax Electronic Portal for facilitating registration, payment of tax,
furnishing of returns, computation and settlement of integrated tax, electronic way bill and for carrying
out such other functions and for such purposes as may be prescribed.

147. Deemed Exports.— The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify
certain supplies of goods as “deemed exports”, where goods supplied do not leave India, and payment
for such supplies is received either in Indian rupees or in convertible foreign exchange, if such goods are
manufactured in India.
148. Special procedure for certain processes. — The Government may, on the recommendations
of the Council, and subject to such conditions and safeguards as may be prescribed, notify certain classes
of reg istered persons, and the special procedures to be followed by such persons including those with
regard to registration, furnishing of return, payment of tax and administration of such persons.
[148A. Track and trace mechanism for certain goods. — (1) The Government may, on the
recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify, —
(a) the goods;
(b) persons or class of persons who are in possession or deal with such goods,
to which the provisions of this section shall apply.
(2) The Governmen t may, in respect of the goods referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1),––
(a) provide a system for enabling affixation of unique identification marking and for
electronic storage and access of information contained therein, through such persons, as m ay be
prescribed;
and ;
(b) prescribe the unique identification marking for such goods; including the information to
be recorded therein.
(3) The persons referr ed to in sub -section ( 1) shall, —
(a) affix on the said goods or packages thereof, a unique i dentification marking, containing
such information and in such manner;
(b) furnish such information and details within such time and maintain such records or
documents, in such form and manner;
(c) furnish details of the machinery installed in the place of business of manufacture of such
goods, including the identification, capacity, duration of operation and such other details or
information, within such time and in such form and manner;
(d) pay such amount in relation to the system referred to in sub -section ( 2),
as may be prescribed.]
149. Goods and services tax compliance rating. — (1) Every registered person may be assigned
a goods and services tax compliance rating score by the Government ba sed on his record of compliance
with the provisions of this Act.
(2) The goods and services tax compliance rating score may be determined on the basis of such
parameters as may be prescribed.
(3) The goods and services tax compliance rating score may be updated at periodic intervals and
intimated to the registered person and also placed in the public domain in such manner as may be
prescribed.
150. Obligation to furnish information return. — (1) Any person, being —
(a) a taxable person; or
(b) a local aut hority or other public body or association; or

The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(c) any authority of the State Government responsible for the collection of value added tax or
sales tax or State excise duty or an authority of the Central Government responsible for the
collection of excise duty or customs duty; or
(d) an income tax authority appointed under the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961
(43 of 1961); or
(e) a banking company within the meaning of clause ( a) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank
of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); o r
(f) a State Electricity Board or an electricity distribution or transmission licensee under the
Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003), or any other entity entrusted with such functions by the Central
Government or the State Government; or
(g) the Registra r or Sub -Registrar appointed under section 6 of the Registration Act, 1908
(16 of 1908); or
(h) a Registrar within the meaning of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); or
(i) the registering authority empowered to register motor vehicles under the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 (59 of 1988); or
(j) the Collector referred to in clause ( c) of section 3 of the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (30 of 2013); or
(k) the recognised stock exchange referred to in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956); or
(l) a depository referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Depositories Act,
(22 of 1996); or
(m) an officer o f the Reserve Bank of India as constituted under section 3 of the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); or
(n) the Goods and Services Tax Network, a company registered under the Companies Act,
(18 of 2013); or
(o) a person to whom a Unique Id entity Number has been granted under sub -section ( 9) of
(p) any other person as may be specified, on the recommendations of the Council, by the
Government,
who is responsible for maintaining record of registration or statement of accounts o r any periodic return
or document containing details of payment of tax and other details of transaction of goods or services or
both or transactions related to a bank account or consumption of electricity or transaction of purchase,
sale or exchange of goo ds or property or right or interest in a property under any law for the time being
in force, shall furnish an information return of the same in respect of such periods, within such time, in
such form and manner and to such authority or agency as may be pre scribed.
(2) Where the Commissioner, or an officer authorised by him in this behalf, considers that the
information furnished in the information return is defective, he may intimate the defect to the person
who has furnished such information return and gi ve him an opportunity of rectifying the defect within a
period of thirty days from the date of such intimation or within such further period which, on an
application made in this behalf, the said authority may allow and if the defect is not rectified withi n the
said period of thirty days or, the further period so allowed, then, notwithstanding anything contained in
any other provisions of this Act, such information return shall be treated as not furnished and the
provisions of this Act shall apply.
(3) Whe re a person who is required to furnish information return has not furnished the same within
the time specified in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the said authority may serve upon him a notice
requiring furnishing of such information return within a period not exceeding ninety days from the date
of service of the notice and such person shall furnish the information return.

[151. Power to call for information. ––The Commissioner or an officer authorised by him may,
by an order, direct any person to fu rnish information relating to any matter dealt with in connection with
this Act, within such time, in such form, and in such manner, as may be specified therein.]
152. Bar on disclosure of information. –– (1) No information [* *] with respect to any matte r
given for the purposes of section 150 or section 151 shall, without the previous consent in writing of the
concerned person or his authorised representative, be published in such manner so as to enable such
particulars to be identified as referring to a particular person and no such information shall be used for
the purpose of any proceedings under this Act [without giving an opportunity of being heard to the
person concerned.]
[* *]
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the publication of any in formation relating to a class of
taxable persons or class of transactions, if in the opinion of the Commissioner, it is desirable in the public
interest to publish such information.
153. Taking assistance from an expert. — Any officer not below the rank of Assistant
Commissioner may, having regard to the nature and complexity of the case and the interest of revenue,
take assistance of any expert at any stage of scrutiny, inquiry, investigation or any other proceedings
before him.
154. Power to take samples .–– The Commissioner or an officer authorised by him may take
samples of goods from the possession of any taxable person, where he considers it necessary, and provide
a receipt for any samples so taken.
155. Burden of proof. –– Where any person claims that he is eligible for input tax credit under this
Act, the burden of proving such claim shall lie on such person.
156. Persons deemed to be public servants. –– All persons discharging functions under this Act
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860).
157. Protection of action taken under this Act. –– (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against the President, State President, Members, Officers or other employees of the
Appellate Tribunal or any other person authorised by the said Appellate Tribunal for anything which is
in good f aith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer appointed or
authorised under this Act for anything which is done or intended to be done in goo d faith under this Act
or the rules made thereunder.
158. Disclosure of information by a public servant. –– (1) All particulars contained in any
statement made, return furnished or accounts or documents produced in accordance with this Act, or in
any recor d of evidence given in the course of any proceedings under this Act (other than proceedings
before a criminal court), or in any record of any proceedings under this Act shall, save as provided in
sub-section ( 3), not be disclosed.
(2) Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) no court
shall, save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), require any officer appointed or authorised under
this Act to produce before it or to give evidence before it in respect of particular s referred to in sub section ( 1).
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the disclosure of, ––
(a) any particulars in respect of any statement, return, accounts, documents, evidence,
affidavit or deposition, for the purpose of any prosecutio n under the Indian Penal Code

The words “of any individual return or part thereof” were omitted by Ma h. 13 of 2021, s. 15( a)(i), w.e.f . 1st January 2022.
These words were inserted by Mah. 13 of 2021, s. 15( a)(ii), w.e.f . 1st January 2022.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(45 of 1860) or the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988) or any other law for the time
being in force; or
(b) any particulars to the Central Government or the State Government or to any person acting
in the implem entation of this Act, for the purposes of carrying out the objects of this Act; or
(c) any particulars when such disclosure is occasioned by the lawful exercise under this Act
of any process for the service of any notice or recovery of any demand; or
(d) any particulars to a civil court in any suit or proceedings, to which the Government or any
authority under this Act is a party, which relates to any matter arising out of any proceedings under
this Act or under any other law for the time being in force a uthorising any such authority to exercise
any powers thereunder; or
(e) any particulars to any officer appointed for the purpose of audit of tax receipts or refunds
of the tax imposed by this Act; or
(f) any particulars where such particulars are relevan t for the purposes of any inquiry into the
conduct of any officer appointed or authorised under this Act, to any person or persons appointed
as an inquiry officer under any law for the time being in force; or
(g) any such particulars to an officer of the Central Government or of any State Government,
as may be necessary for the purpose of enabling that Government to levy or realise any tax or
duty; or
(h) any particulars when such disclosure is occasioned by the lawful exercise by a public
servant or any other statutory authority, of his or its powers under any law for the time being in
force; or
(i) any particulars relevant to any inquiry into a charge of misconduct in connection with any
proceedings under this Act against a practising advocate, a tax practitioner, a practising cost
accountant, a practising chartered accountant, a practising company secretary to the authority
empowered to take disciplina ry action against the members practising the profession of a legal
practitioner, a cost accountant, a chartered accountant or a company secretary, as the case may
be; or
(j) any particulars to any agency appointed for the purposes of data entry on any au tomated
system or for the purpose of operating, upgrading or maintaining any automated system where such
agency is contractually bound not to use or disclose such particulars except for the aforesaid
purposes; or
(k) any such particulars to an officer of the Government as may be necessary for the purposes
of any other law for the time being in force; and
(l) any information relating to any class of taxable persons or class of transactions for
publication, if, in the opinion of the Commissioner, it is desi rable in the public interest, to publish
such information.
[158A. Consent based sharing of information furnished by taxable person. — (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 133, 152 and 158, the following details furnished by a
registered perso n may, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), and on the recommendations of the
Council, be shared by the common portal with such other systems as may be notified by the Government,
in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, namely: —
(a) particulars furnished in the application for registration under section 25 or in the return
filed under section 39 or under section 44;
(b) the particulars uploaded on the common portal for preparation of invoice, the details of
outward supplies furnished under section 37 and the particulars uploaded on the common portal for
generation of documents under section 68;
(c) such other details a s may be prescribed.

(2) For the purposes of sharing details under sub -section ( 1), the consent shall be obtained, of —
(a) the supplier, in respect of details furnished under clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub -section
(1); and
(b) the recipient, in respec t of details furnished under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), and under
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) only where such details include identity information of the recipient,
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no action shall lie
against the Government or the common portal with respect to any liability arising consequent to
information shared under this section and there shall be no impact on the liability to pay tax on the
relevant supply or as per the relevant return.]
159. Publication of information in respect of persons in certain cases. –– (1) If the
Commissioner, or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf, is of the opinion that it is necessary
or expedient in the public interest to publish the name of any person and any other particulars relating to
any proceedings or prosecution under this Act in respect of such person, it may cause to be published
such name and particulars in such manner as it t hinks fit.
(2) No publication under this section shall be made in relation to any penalty imposed under this
Act until the time for presenting an appeal to the Appellate Authority under section 107 has expired
without an appeal having been presented or the appeal, if presented, has been disposed of.
Explanation .–– In the case of firm, company or other association of persons, the names of the
partners of the firm, directors, managing agents, secretaries and treasurers or managers of the company,
or the memb ers of the association, as the case may be, may also be published if, in the opinion of the
Commissioner, or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf, circumstances of the case
justify it.
160. Assessment proceedings, etc. not to be invalid on certain grounds. –– (1) No assessment,
re-assessment, adjudication, review, revision, appeal, rectification, notice, summons or other
proceedings done, accepted, made, issued, initiated, or purported to have been done, accepted, made,
issued, initiated in pursuance of any of th e provisions of this Act shall be invalid or deemed to be invalid
merely by reason of any mistake, defect or omission therein, if such assessment, re -assessment,
adjudication, review, revision, appeal, rectification, notice, summons or other proceedings ar e in
substance and effect in conformity with or according to the intents, purposes and requirements of this
Act or any existing law.
(2) The service of any notice, order or communication shall not be called in question, if the notice,
order or communicati on, as the case may be, has already been acted upon by the person to whom it is
issued or where such service has not been called in question at or in the earlier proceedings commenced,
continued or finalised pursuant to such notice, order or communication.
161. Rectification of errors apparent on the face of record. –– Without prejudice to the
provisions of section 160, and notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act,
any authority, who has passed or issued any decision or order o r notice or certificate or any other
document, may rectify any error which is apparent on the face of record in such decision or order or
notice or certificate or any other document, either on its own motion or where such error is brought to
its notice by any officer appointed under this Act or an officer appointed under the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act or by the affected person within a period of three months from the date of issue of such
decision or order or notice or certificate or any other docum ent, as the case may be:
Provided that no such rectification shall be done after a period of six months from the date of issue
of such decision or order or notice or certificate or any other document:
Provided further that the said period of six months s hall not apply in such cases where the
rectification is purely in the nature of correction of a clerical or arithmetical error, arising from any
accidental slip or omission:
Provided also that where such rectification adversely affects any person, the principles of natural
justice shall be followed by the authority carrying out such rectification.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
162. Bar on jurisdiction of civil courts. –– Save as provided in sections 117 an d 118, no civil court
shall have jurisdiction to deal with or decide any question arising from or relating to anything done or
purported to be done under this Act.
163. Levy of fee. –– Wherever a copy of any order or document is to be provided to any perso n on
an application made by him for that purpose, there shall be paid such fee as may be prescribed.
164. Power of Government to make rules. –– (1) The Government may, on the recommendations
of the Council, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Government may
make rules for all or any of the matters which by this Act are required to be, or may be, prescribed or in
respect of which provisions are to be or may be made by rules.
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective
effect to the rules or any of them from a date not earlier than the date on which the provisions of this Act
come into force.
(4) Any rules made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) may provide that a contravention
thereof shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding ten thousand rupees.
165. Power to make regulations. –– The Government may, by notification, make regula tions
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.
166. Laying of rules, regulations and notifications. –– Every rule made by the Government,
every regulation made by the Government and every notification i ssued by the Government under this
Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before the State Legislature, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, the State Legislature agrees in making any modification in the rule or
regulation or in the notification, as the case may be, or the State Legislature agrees that the rule or
regulation or the notification should not be made, the rule or regulation or notification, as the case may
be, shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation or notification, as the case may be.
167. Delegation of powers. –– The Commissioner may, by notification, di rect that subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, any power exercisable by any authority or
officer under this Act may be exercisable also by another authority or officer as may be specified in such
notification.
168. Power to issue instructions or directions. –– The Commissioner may, if he considers it
necessary or expedient so to do for the purpose of uniformity in the implementation of this Act, issue
such orders, instructions or directions to the State tax officers as it may deem fit, and thereupon all such
officers and all other persons employed in the implementation of this Act shall observe and follow such
orders, instructions or directions.
[168A. Power of Government to extend time limit in special circumstance s.–– (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Government may, on the recommendations of the
Council, by notification, extend the time limit specified in, or prescribed or notified under this Act in
respect of actions which cannot be complete d or complied with, due to force majeure .
(2) The power to issue notification under sub -section ( 1) shall include the power to give
retrospective effect to such notification from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of
this Act.

Explanation .–– For the purposes of this section, the expression “ force majeure ” means a case of
war, epidemic, flood, drought, fire, cyclone, earthquake or any other calamity caused by nature or
otherwise affecting the implementation of any of the provisions of this A ct.]
169. Service of notice in certain circumstances. –– (1) Any decision, order, summons, notice or
other communication under this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be served by any one of the
following methods, namely: —
(a) by giving or tendering it directly or by a messenger including a courier to the addressee or
the taxable person or to his manager or authorised representative or an advocate or a tax practitioner
holding authority to appear in the proceedings on behalf of the taxable person or t o a person
regularly employed by him in connection with the business, or to any adult member of family
residing with the taxable person; or
(b) by registered post or speed post or courier with acknowledgement due, to the person for
whom it is intended or his authorised representative, if any, at his last known place of business or
residence; or
(c) by sending a communication to his e -mail address provided at the time of registration or
as amended from time to time; or
(d) by making it available on the com mon portal; or
(e) by publication in a newspaper circulating in the locality in which the taxable person or the
person to whom it is issued is last known to have resided, carried on business or personally worked
for gain; or
(f) if none of the modes afor esaid is practicable, by affixing it in some conspicuous place at
his last known place of business or residence and if such mode is not practicable for any reason,
then by affixing a copy thereof on the notice board of the office of the concerned officer o r authority
who or which passed such decision or order or issued such summons or notice.
(2) Every decision, order, summons, notice or any communication shall be deemed to have been
served on the date on which it is tendered or published or a copy thereof is affixed in the manner provided
in sub -section ( 1).
(3) When such decision, order, summons, notice or any communication is sent by registered post
or speed post, it shall be deemed to have been received by the addressee at the expiry of the period
norma lly taken by such post in transit unless the contrary is proved.
170. Rounding off of tax, etc. –– The amount of tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum
payable, and the amount of refund or any other sum due, under the provisions of this Act shall be rounded
off to the nearest rupee and, for this purpose, where such amount contains a part of a ru pee consisting of
paise, then, if such part is fifty paise or more, it shall be increased to one rupee and if such part is less
than fifty paise it shall be ignored.
171. Antiprofiteering measure. –– (1) Any reduction in rate of tax on any supply of goods or
services or the benefit of input tax credit shall be passed on to the recipient by way of commensurate
reduction in prices.
(2) The Central Government may, on recommendations of the Council, by notification, constitute
an Authority, or empower an exis ting Authority constituted under any law for the time being in force, to
examine whether input tax credits availed by any registered person or the reduction in the tax rate have
actually resulted in a commensurate reduction in the price of the goods or ser vices or both supplied by
him.
[Provided that, the Government may by notification, on the recommendations of the Council,
specify the date from which the said Authority shall not accept any request for examination as to whether
input tax credits availed b y any registered person or the reduction in the tax rate have actually resulted
in a commensurate reduction in the price of the goods or services or both supplied by him.

This proviso and Explanation was added by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 38( 1), w.e.f . 27th September 2024.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
Explanation .— For the purposes of this sub -section, “request for examination” shall mean the
written application filed by an applicant requesting for examination as to whether input tax credits
availed by any registered person or the reduction in the tax rate have actually resulted in a commensurate
reduction in the price of the goods or services or both supplied by him .]
(3) The Authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall exercise such powers and discharge such
functions as may be prescribed.
[(3A) Where the Authority referred to in sub -section ( 2), after holding examination as requi red
under the said sub -section comes to the conclusion that any registered person has profiteered under sub section ( 1), such person shall be liable to pay penalty equivalent to ten per cent. of the amount so
profiteered:
Provided that, no penalty shall b e leviable if the profiteered amount is deposited within thirty days
of the date of passing of the order by the Authority.
Explanation [1].— For the purposes of this section, the expression “profiteered” shall mean the
amount determined on account of not passing the benefit of reduction in rate of tax on supply of goods
or services or both or the benefit of input tax credit to the recipient by way of commensurate reduction
in the price of the goods or services or both.]
[Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this section, the expression “Authority” shall include the
“Appellate Tribunal” .]
172. Removal of difficulties. –– (1) If any difficulty a rises in giving effect to any provisions of
this Act, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by a general or a special order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
or the rules or regulations made thereunder, as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of
removing the said difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of [five years] from the date
of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before the
State Legislature.
173. Repeals. –– (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, on and from the date of commencement
of this Act, the following laws are h ereby repealed (hereinafter referred to as “the repealed Acts”),
namely: —
(a) The Maharashtra Betting Tax Act, 1925 (VI of 1925).
(b) The Maharashtra Purchase Tax on Sugarcane Act, 1962 (Mah. IX of 1962).
(c) The Maharashtra Advertisements Tax Act, 1967 (Mah. XVIII of 1967).
(d) The Maharashtra Forest Development (Tax on sale of Forest Produce by Government or
Forest Development Corporation) Act, 1983 (Mah. XXII of 1983).
(e) The Maharashtra Tax on Luxuries Act, 1987 (Mah. XLI of 1987).
(f) The Mahara shtra Tax on Entry of Motor Vehicles into Local Areas Act, 1987 (Mah. XLII
of 1987).
(g) The Maharashtra Tax on the Entry of Goods into Local Areas Act, 2002 (Mah. IV of
2003).
(h) The Maharashtra Tax on Lotteries Act, 2006 (Mah. XLIII of 2006).

Existing Explanation was renumbered as Explanation 1 by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 38( 2), w.e.f . 27th September 2024.
Existing Explanation was renumbered as Explanation 1 and after Explanation 1 as so renumbered this Explanation was
added by Mah. 8 of 2025, s. 38( 2), w.e.f . 27th September 2024.
No. GST.1020/C.R. 74A/Taxation -1, dated the 16th July 2020.

(2) Every registration certificate, licence or permission, as the case may be, granted under any of
the repealed Acts or such repealed provision, shall stand cancelled with effect from the appointed day.
174. Savings. –– (1) The repeal of the said Acts spec ified in section 173 shall not, —
(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which such repeal takes effect; or
(b) affect the previous operation of any enactment or part thereof, so repealed and orders or
anything duly done or suffered t hereunder; or
(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation, or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the
repealed Acts, orders under repealed Acts; or
(d) affect any tax, surcharge, penalty, interest, fee or fine as are due or may become due or
any forfeiture or punishment incurred or inflicted in respect of any offence or violation committed
against the provisions of repealed Acts; or
(e) affect any investigation, inquiry, audit, assessment, reassessment, refund, determination,
advance ruling, re ctification and any other legal proceedings or recovery of arrears or remedy in
respect of any such tax, surcharge, penalty, interest, fee, fine, right, privilege, obligation, liability,
forfeiture or punishment, as aforesaid, and any such investigation, i nquiry, audit, assessment,
reassessment, refund, determination, advance ruling, rectification and any other legal proceedings
or recovery of arrears or remedy in respect of any such tax, surcharge, penalty, interest, fee, fine,
interest, right, privilege, obligation, liability, forfeiture or punishment, as aforesaid, may be
instituted, continued or enforced, and any such tax, surcharge, penalty, interest, fee, fine, forfeiture
or punishment may be levied or imposed as if these Acts had not been so repealed; or
(f) affect any proceedings including that relating to an appeal, revision, review or reference,
instituted before, on or after the appointed day under the said repealed Acts or repealed provisions,
and such proceedings shall be continued under the sai d repealed Acts or repealed provisions, as if
this Act had not come into force;
(g) those laws (including any earlier law continued in force under any provisions thereof), and
all rules, regulations, orders, notifications, forms, certificates and notices, appointments and
delegation of powers issued under those laws and in force immediately before the appointed day
shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, in so far as they apply, continue to have effect after
the appointed day for the purposes of the levy, returns, assessment, reassessment, appeal,
determination, revision, rectification, reference, limitation, production and inspection of accounts
and documents and search of premises, transfer of proceedings, payment and recovery, calculation
of cumulative quantum of benefits, exemption from payment of tax and deferment of due date for
payment of tax, cancellation of the certificate of entitlement, collection, or deduction of tax at
source, refund or set off of any tax withholding of any refund, ex emption from payment of tax,
collection of statistics, the power to make rules, the imposition of any penalty, or of interest or
forfeiture of an sum where such levy, returns, assessment, reassessment, appeal, determination,
revision, rectification, refere nce, limitation, payment and recovery, calculation of cumulative
quantum of benefits, exemption from payment of tax and deferment of due date for payment of tax,
cancellation of the certificate of entitlement, collection, deduction of tax at source, refund , set-off,
withholding of any refund exemption, collection of statistics, the power to make rules, limitation,
production and inspection of accounts and documents and search of premises, transfer of
proceedings, penalty, interest or forfeiture of any sum r elates to any period ending before the
appointed day, or for any other purpose whatsoever connected with or incidental to any of the
purposes aforesaid and whether or not the tax, penalty, interest, sum forfeited or tax deducted at
source, if any, in relat ion to such proceedings is paid before or after the appointed day.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the foregoing sub -section, the provisions of
sections 7 and 25 of the Maharashtra General Clauses Act (I of 1904) shall apply in relation to the repeal
of any of the laws referred to in this section as if the law so repealed had been an enactment within the
meaning of section 7 of the said Act.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
SCHEDULE I
[See section 7]
ACTIVITIES TO BE TREATED AS SUPPLY EVEN IF MADE WITHOUT
CONSIDERATION
1. Permanent transfer or disposal of business assets where input tax credit has been availed on such
assets.
2. Supply of goods or services or both between related persons or between distinct persons as
specified in section 25, when made in the course or furtherance of business:
Provided that gifts not exceeding fifty thousand rupees in value in a financial year by an employer
to an employee shall not be treated as supply of goods or services or both.
3. Supply of goods —
(a) by a principal to his agent where the agent undertakes to supply such goods on behalf of
the principal; or
(b) by an agent to his principal where the agent undertakes to receive such goods on behalf of
the principal.
4. Import of services by a [person] from a related person or from any of his other establishments
outside India, in the course or furtherance of business.

This word was substituted for the words “taxable person” by Mah. 67 of 2018, s. 29.

SCHEDULE II
[See section 7]
ACTIVITIES [OR TRANSACTIONS] TO BE TREATED AS SUPPLY OF GOODS OR
SUPPLY OF SERVICES
1. Transfer. — (a) any transfer of the title in goods is a supply of goods;
(b) any transfer of right in goods or of undivided share in goods without the transfer of title thereof,
is a supply of services;
(c) any transfer of title in goods under an agreement which stipulates that property in goods shall
pass at a future date upon payment of full consideration as agreed, is a supply of goods.
2. Land and Building. — (a) any lease, tenancy, easement, licence to occu py land is a supply of
services;
(b) any lease or letting out of the building including a commercial, industrial or residential complex
for business or commerce, either wholly or partly, is a supply of services.
3. Treatment or process. — Any treatment or process which is applied to another person’s goods is
a supply of services.
4. Transfer of business assets. — (a) where goods forming part of the assets of a business are
transferred or disposed of by or under the directions of the person carrying on the business so as no
longer to form part of those assets, [* * *] such transfer or disposal is a supply of goods by the
person;
(b) where, by or under the direction of a person carrying on a business, goods held or used for the
purposes of the business are put to any private use or are used, or made available to any person for use,
for any purpose other than a purpose of the business, [* * *] the usage or making available of such goods
is a supply of services;
(c) where any person ceases to be a taxable p erson, any goods forming part of the assets of any
business carried on by him shall be deemed to be supplied by him in the course or furtherance of his
business immediately before he ceases to be a taxable person, unless —
(i) the business is transferred as a going concern to another person; or
(ii) the business is carried on by a personal representative who is deemed to be a taxable
person.
5. Supply of services. — The following shall be treated as supply of service, namely: —
(a) renting of immovable property;
(b) construction of a complex, building, civil structure or a part thereof, including a complex or
building intended for sale to a buyer, wholly or partly, except where the entire consideration has been
received after issuance of completion certificate, where required, by the competent authority or after its
first occupation, whichever is earlier.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this clause ––
(1) the expression “competent authority” means the Government or any aut hority authorised
to issue completion certificate under any law for the time being in force and in case of non requirement of such certificate from such authority, from any of the following, namely: —
(i) an architect registered with the Council of Archite cture constituted under the
Architects Act, 1972 (20 of 1972); or

These words were inserted and shall always be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 1st day of July 2017 by Mah.
of 2018, s. 30 .
1st July 2017 by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 13.
1st July 2017 by Mah. 23 of 2020, s. 13.
The Maharashtra Goods and Service s Tax Act , 2017 [2017 : Mah. XLIII
(ii) a chartered engineer registered with the Institution of Engineers (India); or
(iii) a licensed surveyor of the respective local body of the city or town or village or
development or planning authority;
(2) the expression “construction” includes additions, alterations, replacements or remodelling
of any existing civil structure;
(c) temporary transfer or permitting the use or enjoyment of any intellectual property right;
(d) development, design, programming, customisation, adaptation, upgradation, enhancement,
implementation of information technology software;
(e) agreeing to the obli gation to refrain from an act, or to tolerate an act or a situation, or to do an
act; and
(f) transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for
cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration.
6. Co mposite Supply. — The following composite supplies shall be treated as a supply of services,
namely: —
(a) works contract as defined in clause ( 119) of section 2; and
(b) supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goo ds,
being food or any other article for human consumption or any drink (other than alcoholic liquor for
human consumption), where such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable
consideration.
[* *]

SCHEDU LE III
[See section 7]
ACTIVITIES OR TRANSACTIONS WHICH SHALL BE TREATED NEITHER AS A
SUPPLY OF GOODS NOR A SUPPLY OF SERVICES
1. Services by an employee to the employer in the course of or in relation to his employment.
2. Services by any court or Tribunal established under any law for the time being in force.
3. (a) The functions performed by the Members of Parliament, Members of State Legislature,
Members of Panchayats, Members of Municipalities and Members of other lo cal authorities;
(b) the duties performed by any person who holds any post in pursuance of the provisions of the
Constitution in that capacity; or
(c) the duties performed by any person as a Chairperson or a Member or a Director in a body
established by the Central Government or a State Government or local authority and who is not deemed
as an employee before the commencement of this clause.
4. Services of funeral, burial, crematorium or mortuary including transportation of the deceased.
5. Sale of land and, subject to clause ( b) of paragraph 5 of Schedule II, sale of building.
6. Actionable claims, other than [specified actionable claims] .
[7. Supply of goods from a place outside India to another place outside India without such goods
entering into I ndia3.
8. (a) Supply of warehoused goods to any person before clearance for home consumption;
[(aa) Supply of goods warehoused in a Special Economic Zone or in a Free Trade Warehousing
Zone to any person before clearance for exports or to the Domestic Tariff Area;]
(b) supply of goods by the consignee to any other person, by endorsement of documents of title to
the goods, after the goods have been dispatched from the port of origin located outside India but before
clearance for home consumption.]
[9. A ctivity of apportionment of co -insurance premium by the lead insurer to the co -insurer for
the insurance services jointly supplied by the lead insurer and the co -insurer to the insured in
coinsurance agreements, subject to the condition that the lead insur er pays the central tax, the State tax,
the Union territory tax and the integrated tax on the entire amount of premium paid by the insured.
10. Services by insurer to the reinsurer for which ceding commission or the reinsurance
commission is deducted from reinsurance premium paid by the insurer to the reinsurer, subject to the
condition that the Central tax, the State tax, the Union territory tax and the integrated tax is paid by the
reinsurer on the gross reinsurance premium payable by the insurer to the reinsurer, inclusive of the said
ceding commission or the reinsurance commission].
Explanation [1].— For the purposes of paragraph 2, the term “court” includes District Court,
High Court and Supreme Court.

These words were substituted for the words “lottery, betting and gambling” by Mah. 1 of 2024, s. 4, w.e.f . 1st October
2023.
Paragraphs 7 and 8 and Explanation 2 thereof (as inserted by section 31 of Mah. 67 of 2018) shall be deemed to have
been inserted with effect from 1st July 2017 by Mah. 32 of 2023, s. 23, w.e.f . 1st October 2023.
Sub-section ( 2) of section 23 of Mah. 32 of 2023 reads as u nder: —
(2) No refund shall be made of all the tax which has been collected, but which would not have been so collected,
had sub -section ( 1) been in force at all material times.
The existing Explanation was renumbered as Explanation 1 and after Explanation 1 so renumbered, Explanation 2 was
The Maharashtra Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 [2017 : M ah. XLIII
[Explanation 2. — For the purposes of [clause (a) of] paragraph 8, the expression “warehoused
goods” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962).]
[Explanation 3. –– For the purposes of clause ( aa) of paragraph 8, the expressions “Special
Economic Zone”, “Free Trade Warehousing Zone” and “Domestic Tariff Area” shall have the same
meanings respectively as assigned to them in section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.]

The existing Explanation was renumbered as Explanation 1 and after Explanation 1 so renumbered, Explanation 2 was
with effect from the 1st July 2017.