THE TELANGANA FOREST ACT, 1967.
(ACT NO.1 OF 1967)
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section s
CHAPTER -I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER -II
Reserved Forests
3. Power to reserve forests.
4. Notification by Government .
5. Suits barred .
6. Proclamation by Forest Settlement Officer .
7. Bar of accrual of forest rights and prohibition of
clearings.
8. Inquiry by Forest Settlement Officer .
9. Powers of Forest Settlement Officer.
10. Claims to certain rights.
11. Claims to rights of way, etc.,
12. Compensation for rights.
13. Appeals from the orders of Forest Settlement
Officer .
14. Appointment of Pleaders.
15. Notification declaring Forest reserved .
16. Extinction of rights not claimed.

[Act No. 1 of 19 67]
17. No right acquired over reserved forest except as
herein provided .
18. Right continued under section 11 not to be
alienated without sanction .
19. Power to stop ways and wa ter courses in reserved
forest.
20. Penalties for trespass or damage in reserved forest
and acts prohibited in such forest.
21. Suspensi on of rights in reserved forest .
22. Persons bound to assist forest officer and police
officer .
23. Power to declare reserved forest as no longer
reserved.
CHAPTER III
Protected Forests
24. Protected forests .
25. Power to close forest against pasture .
26. Power to issue notification reserving trees, etc.,
27. Power to make rules .
28. Power to declare protected forest to cease to be
protected .
CHAPTER IV
Control of timber and other forest produce in transit
or possession.
29. Power to make rules to regulate the transit and
possession of timber and other forest produce.
30. Government and forest officers not liable for
damage to forest produce at depots and stations .

[Act No. 1 of 19 67] 3
31. Persons employed at depots and stations bound to
aid in case of accident .
CHAPER V
Possession of Sandalwood
32. Possession of sa ndal-wood under licence or mark .
33. Forms and conditions of licence.
34. Power to cancel or suspend licence.
35. Appeal .
36. Penalties.
CHAPTER VI
Of the collection of drift and stranded timber.
37. Certain kinds of timber to be deemed property of
Government until title thereto is proved and may be
collected accordingly.
38. Notice to claimants to drift timber.
39. Procedure on the prese ntation of claim to such
timber.
40. Disposal of unclaimed timber.
41. Government and their officers not liable for damage
to timber collected under section 37 .
42. Payment to be made by claimant before timber is
delivered to him .
43. Power to make rules and prescribe penalty for
contravention thereof .
CHAPTER VII
Penalties and Procedure.
44. Seizure of property liable to confiscation and
procedure thereupon .
[Act No. 1 of 19 67]
45. Timber, forest produce, tools etc., when liable to
confiscation.
46. Disposal on conclusion of trial for forest offence of
timber or forest produce in re spect of which it was
committed .
47. Procedure when offender is not known or cannot be
found.
48. Procedure in rega rd to perishable property seized
under section 44 .
49. Appeal from orders under section 45, section 46, or
50. Property when to vest in Government.
51. Saving of power to release property seized .
52. Penalty for counterfeiting marks on trees and timber
and for altering boundary marks .
53. Power to arrest without warrant.
54. Power to release on bond a person arrested .
55. Punishment of wrongful seizure or arrest .
56. Power to prevent commission of offence .
57. Power to try offences summarily.
58. Operation of other laws not barred .
58-A. Order of confiscation not to bar imposition of other
penalty.
59. Power to compound offences.
60. Presumption that timber or forest produce belongs
to the Central or State Government .
CHAPTER VIII
Cattle Trespass
61. Cattle Trespass Act, 1871 to apply.
[Act No. 1 of 19 67] 5
CHAPTER IX
Powers of Forest Officers
62. Government may invest forest officers with certain
powers.
63. Forest Officers deemed public servants .
64. Power of entry and inspection .
65. Indemnity for acts done in good faith.
CHAPTER X
Miscellaneous
66. Revision .
67. Power of Government to exempt any area from the
provisions of the Act.
68. Power of Government to make rules.
69. Government may delegate powers.
70. Recovery of money due to Government .
71. Land required under this Act to be deemed to be
needed for public purpose under the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 .
72. Repeal .

THE TELANGANA FOREST ACT, 1967 .1

CHAPTER -I
PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the 2Telangana Forest Act,
1967.

(2) It extends to the whole of the State of 2Telangana.

(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the State
Government may, by notification in the 2Telangana Gazette,
appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires -

(a) „cattle‟ includes cows, oxen, elephants, camels,
buffaloes, horses, mules, asses, pigs, sheep, goats and
such other kind of animals as the Government may, by
notification, specify;

(b) „Court‟ means the principal civil court of original
jurisdiction;

(c) „Divisional Forest Officer‟ means the forest officer in
independent charge of a forest division;

1. The Andhra Pradesh Forest Act, 1967 received the assent of the
President on 24.02.1967. The said Act in force in the combined State, as
on 02.06. 2014, has been adapted to the State of Telangana, under
Act 6 of 2014) vide. the Notification issued in G.O.Ms.No.22, E.F.S&T
(For.I) Department, dated 13.05.2015.
2. Substituted by G.O.Ms .No.22, E.F.S&T (For.I) Department, dated
13.05.2015.
and
commencement.
Definition s.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
(d) „forest division‟ means such area as may be
declared, by notification, by the Government or by such
authority as may be empowered by the Governmen t in this
behalf to be a forest division for the purposes of this Act;

(e) „forest offence‟ means an offence punishable under
this Act or any rule made thereunder;

(f) „forest officer‟ means any person appointed by the
Government or by any officer empowered b y the
Government in this behalf, -

(i) to be the Chief Conservator, Deputy Chief
Conservator, Conservator, Deputy Conservator, Assistant
Conservator, Divisional Forest Officer, Ra nger, Deputy
Ranger, Forester, Forest Guard, Forest Watcher, Thanadar,
Checking Officer or Plantation Watcher;

(ii) to perform any function of a forest officer under
this Act or any rule or orde r made thereunder;

but does not include a Forest Settlement Officer appointed
under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of s ection 4;

(g) „forest produce‟ includes –

(1) The following whether found in, or brought from a
forest or not, that is to say timber, bamboos, charcoal,
rubber, cacutchour, catechu, wood -oil, resin, natural varnish
bark, lac, mahuaflow ers, mahuaseeds, myrobalans, tun ki
leaves, rousa grass, rauwolf ia serpentin a, adda leaves;

(2) The following when found in, or brought from a
forest, that is to say -

[Act No. 1 of 1967] 3
(i) trees, such leaves, flower s and fruits as may be
prescribed and all other parts or produce not herein before
mentioned of trees;

(ii) plants not being trees (including grass,
creepers, reeds and moss) and all parts or produce of such
plants;

(iii) wild animals, wild birds, skins, tusks, horns,
bones, silk cocoons, honey, wax, and all other parts or
produce of animals and birds;

(iv) peat, surface soil, rock and minerals (including
lime stone and laterite) mineral oil and all products of mines
or quarries; and

(3) Such other produce as may be prescribed;

(h) „Government ‟ means the State Government;

(i) „magistrate‟ means a m agistrate of the first class or
second class havi ng jurisdiction and includes a m agistrate
of the third class specially empowered by the Go vernment
in this behalf to try f orest offences;

(j) „notification‟ means a notification published in the
4Telangana Gazette;

(k) „owner‟ in relation to a forest includes a
mortgagee with possession, lessee or other person having
right to the possession and enjoyment of the forest;

(l) „prescribed‟ means prescribed by rules made
under this Act;

4. Substituted by G.O.Ms.No.22, E.F.S&T (For.I) Department, dated
13.05.2015.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
(m) „red sanders wood‟ means the wood der ived out
of any part of the tree known by its botanical name as
“Pterocarpus santalinus” and include chips, dust or powder
of such wood;

(n) „river‟ includes a stream, canal, backwater, creek
and other channel, natural or artificial;

(o) „sandalwood‟ means the wood derived out of any
part of the tree known by its botanical name as Santalum
album and includes chips, dust or powder of such wood;

(p) „teakwood‟ means the woods derived out of any
part of the tree known by its botanical name as Tectona
grandis;

(q) „timber‟ includes trees fallen or felled, and all
wood, cut up or sawn;

(r) „tree‟ includes bamboos, stu mps, brushwood and
canes.

CHAPTER -II
Reserved Forests

3. The Government may constitute any land as a reserved
Forest in the manner hereinafter provided.

4. (1) Whenever it is proposed to constitute any land as a
reserved Forest, the Government shall publish a notification
in the 5Telangana Gazette and in the District Gazett e
concerned, if any ,-

5. Substituted by G.O.Ms.No.22, E.F.S&T (For.I) Department, dated
13.05.2015. Notification by
Government . Power to reserve
forests .
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 5
(a) specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation and
limits of such land;

(b) declaring that it is proposed to constitute such
land as reserved forest;

(c) appointing a Forest Settlement Officer to consider
the objections, if any, against the declaration under c lause
(b) and to enquire into and determine the existence, nature
and extent of any rights claimed by, or alleged to exist in
favour of, any person in or over any land comprised within
such limits, or to a ny forest produce of such land, and to
deal with the same as provided in this Chapter.

Explanation: - (1) For the purpose of c lause (a), it shall
be sufficient to describe the limits of the land by any well known or readily intelligible boundaries, such a s roads,
rivers, bridges and the like.

(2) A person appointed to be a Forest Settle ment
Officer under clause (c) of sub -section (1) shall be an officer
of the Revenue Department not below the rank of a Revenue
Divisional Officer.

(3) Any forest officer may represent the Forest
Department at the inquiry conducted under this Chapter.

5. Save as othe rwise provided in this Act, no c ourt shall
between the dates of the publica tion of the notification
under s ection 4 and the notification to be issued under
Government to establish any right in, or over, any land, or to
forest produce of any land included in the notification
published under section 4.

Suits barred .
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
6. (1) Where a noti fication has been issued under s ection
4, the Forest Settlement Officer shall publi sh in the main
language of the d istrict, in the District Gazette concerned or
where there is no such Gazette, in the 6Telangana Gazette,
and in the regional language in every town and village and
at the headquarters of each taluk and at the office of the
Gram Panchayat, in which any port ion of land included in
the said notification is situate, a proclamation, -

(a) specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation and
limits of the land proposed to be included within the
reserved forest;

(b) setting forth the substance of the provisions of

(c) explaining the consequences which, as
hereinafter provided, will ensue on the reservation of such
forest; and

(d) fixing a period of not less than six months and not
more than one year from the date of publishing such
proclamation at the headquarters of the taluk, and calling for
objections, if any, within the period so fixed from any person
interested against the declaration under c lause (b) of
sub-section (1) of s ection 4, and requiring every person
claiming any right i n such land either to present to the said
officer, within the period so fixed, a written statement
specifying, or to appear before him within the said period
and state, the nature of such rights, and in either case to
produce all documents in support there of.

6. Substituted by G.O.Ms.No.22, E.F.S&T (For.I) Department, dated
13.05.2015. Proclamation by
Forest S ettlement
Officer.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 7
(2) The Forest Settlement Officer shall also serve in the
manner prescribed, a copy of the proclamation on every
known or reputed owner or occupier of any land included in
or adjoining the land proposed to be constituted as a
reserved forest, or on his recognised agent or manager.

7. (1) During the interval between the publication of a
notification in the 7Telangana Gazette under s ection 4 and
the date f ixed by the notification under s ection 15 -

(a) no right shall be acquired by any person in or over
the land incl uded in the notification under s ection 4 except
by succession or under a grant or contract in writing made
or entered into by or on behalf of the Government or any
person in whom such right was vested before the
publica tion of the notification under s ection 4;

(b) no new house shall be built or plantation formed,
no fresh clearing for cultivation or for any other purpose
shall be made, on such land and no trees shall be cu t from
such land for the purpose of trade or manufacture:

Provided that nothing shall prohibit the doing of any act
specified in this clause with the permission in writing of the
Forest Settlement Officer; and

(c) no person shall set fire or kindle or leave burning
any fire in such manner as to endanger or damage such
land or forest produce.

(2) No patta in such land shall be granted by or on
behalf of the Government.

7. Substituted by G.O.Ms.No.22, E.F.S&T (For.I) Department, dated
13.05.2015. Bar of accrual of
forest rights and
prohibition of
clearings.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
8. (1) The Forest Settlement Officer shal l consider every
objection and inqui re into every claim made under s ection 6,
after recording in writing the statements made or evidence
given in pursuance of the proclamation published or notice
served under that section. He shall record any
representatio n which the forest officer, if any, representing
the Forest Depart ment under sub -section (3) of s ection 4,
may make in respect of any such objection or claim.

(2) The evidence under sub -section (1) shall be
recorded in the manner provided by the Code of Civil
Procedure , 1908 in appealable cases.

9. For the purpose of an inquiry under section 8, the
Forest Settlement Officer may exercise the following powers,
namely:

(a) power to enter by himself or to authorise any officer
to enter upon any land and to survey, demarcate and make
a map of the land; and

(b) the powers conferred on a civil c ourt by the Code of
Civil Procedure 1908, for summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining him on oath and
requiring the production of any document or other article.

10. (1) where the claim relate s to a right in or over any land
other than the following rights: -

(a) a right of way;

(b) a right to water course, or to use of water;

(c) a right of pasture; or

(d) a right to forest produce;
Inquiry by Forest
Settlement Officer
Claims to certain
rights Powers of F orest
Settlement Officer .
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 9
the Forest Settlement Officer shall, after considering the
particulars of such claim, and the objections of the forest
officer, if any, pass, an order, admitting or rejecting the
same wholly or in part after recording the reasons there for.

(2) (a) If any claim is admitt ed wholly or in part under
sub-section (1) , the Forest Settlement Officer may: -

(i) accept the voluntary surrender of the right by the
claimant or determine the amount of compensation payable
for the surrender of the right of the claimant, as the case
may be; or

(ii) direct the exclusion of the land from the limits of
the proposed forest; or

(iii) acquire such land in the manner provided by
8the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter in this sub section referred to as the said Act.)

(b) For the purpose of acquiring such land –

(i) the acquisition shall be deemed to be for a public
purpo se; and the notification under s ection 4 shall be
deemed to be a notification under sub -section (1) of section
of the said Act;

(ii) the Forest Settlement Officer shall be deemed to
be a Collector under the said Act, and the claimant shall be
deemed to be a person interested and appearing before him
in pursua nce of a notice given under section 9 of the said
Act;

(iii) the provisions of s ections 5 -A, 6, 7 and 8 of the
said Act shall not be applicable; and

8. See now the Central Act No.30 of 2013.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
(iv) the Forest Settlement Officer with the c onsent of
the claimant, or the c ourt as defined in the said Act with the
consent of the claimant and of the Government may, instead
of money compensation, award compensation by the grant
of any other land in exchange, by the grant of any right in or
over land or partly by the grant of any land o r any right
therein and partly by the payment of money.

11. (1) Where the claim relates to any of the rights
specified in c lauses (a) to (d) of sub -section (1) of s ection
10, the Forest Settlement Officer shall, after considering the
particulars of such claim so far as may be necessary to
define the nature , incidents and extent of the right claimed,
and the objections of the forest off icer, if any, pass an order,
admitting or rejecting such claim wholly or in part, after
recording the reasons therefor.

(2) Where the claim admitted relates to a right for the
beneficial enjoyment of any land or building, the Forest
Settlement Officer shall record the designation , position and
area of such land and the designation and position of such
building.

(3) Where the claim admitted relates to a right of way or
to a water course or to the use of water, the Forest
Settlement Officer shall, either accept the voluntary
surrender of the right by the claimant, with or without
conditions, or pass an or der for the continuance of the
exercise of such right, subject to such conditions as may be
agreed upon between the Forest Department and the
claimant or in default of such agreement, as the Forest
Settlement Officer, may impose.

(4) Where the claim admitted relates to a right of
pasture or to forest produce, the Forest Settlement Officer
shall, either accept the voluntary surrender of such right or
pass an order, providing for the exercise of such right, if Claims to rights of
way, etc.,
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 11
any, subject to such co nditions or restrictions as he may
impose, or directing the exclusion of the land of sufficient
extent, of a suitable kind, and in a locality reasonably
convenient to the claimant, by altering the limits of the
proposed reserved forest.

(5) In the order passed under sub -section (4) the
Forest Settlement Officer shall record, as far as practicable,
the number and description of the cattle which the claimant
is from time to time, entitled to graze, the local limits within
which, and the seasons during which , such pasture is
permitted, or the quantity of timber or other forest produce
which the claimant is authorised to take or receive, the local
limits within which, the seasons during which, and the mode
in which , the taking or receiving such produce is permitted,
and such other particulars as may be required in order to
define the extent of the right which is continued and the
mode in which it may be exercised.

(6) A copy of every order passed under this section
shall be furnished to the claimant by th e Forest Settlement
Officer and another copy shall be forwarded to the forest
officer , if any, representing the Forest Depar tment under
sub-section (3) of s ection 4 or where no such officer is
appointed, to the Divisional Forest Officer.

12. Where the Forest Settlement Officer finds it impossible,
having due regard to the maintenance of the reserved
forest, to make such settlement under s ection 11 as shall
ensure the continued exercise of the said rights to the extent
so admitte d, he shall direct the Forest Department to pay
compensation as determined on the basis of the value of
such right on the d ate of notification under s ection 4, in
accordance with the provisions of the 9Land Acquisition Act,
1894, in so far as such provisions are applicable.

9. See now the Central Act No.30 of 2013. Compensation fo r
rights.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
13. (1) Where a claim is rejected wholly or in part, the
claimant may, within ninety days from the date of the order
under sub -section (1) of section 10 and within s ixty days
from the date of the order under sub -section (1) of s ection
11, prefer an appeal to the district c ourt having jurisdiction in
respect of such rejection only.

(2) W here a claim is admitted under section 10 or
such claim does not relate to the acquisition of any land
under the 10Land Acquisition Act, 1894, a like appeal,
subject to the same period of limitation and subject to the
same conditions, may be preferred to the district c ourt
having jurisdiction on behalf of the Government by the forest
officer or other person, generally or specially empowered by
the Government in this behalf.

(3) Every order passed on appeal under this section
shall be final.

(4) Where the d istrict court, on appeal, decides that the
claim or such part thereof as has been rejected should be
admitted, the Forest Settlement Officer shall proceed to deal
with it in like manner as if it has been in the first instance
admitted by himself.

14. The Government or any person who has made a claim
under this Act may appoint any person to appear, plead and
act on their or his behalf in the course of any enquiry or
other proceeding under this Act.

15. (1) Upon the occurrence of the following events
namely: -

10. See now the Cent ral Act No.30 of 2013. Appeals from the
orders of Forest
Settlement Officer .

Appointment of
Pleaders .
Notification
declaring forest
reserved .
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 13
(a) the period fixed under section 6 for preferring of an
objection or a claim had elapsed, and every objection or
claim made under that section was disposed of by the
Forest Settlement Officer; an d

(b) if any such claim w as made, the period limited by
such claim had elapsed, and every appeal presented within
such period was disposed of by the appellate authority; and

(c) all proceedings mentioned in s ection 10 were taken
and all lands, if any, to be included in the proposed forest,
which the Forest Settlement Of ficer had, under s ection 10,
elected to acquire under the 11Land Acquisition Act, 1894,
had become vested in the Gover nment under s ection 16 of
that Act;

the Government may publish a notification specifying
definitely according to the boundary marks erected or
otherwise, the limits of the forest which it is intended to
reserve and declaring the same to be reserved from a date
to be fixed by such notification and from the date so fixed,
such forest shall be deemed to be a reserved forest.

(2) Copies of the notification shall also be published in
the District Gazette, if any, and in the manner provi ded for
the proclamatio n under s ection 6.

16. Rights in respect of whic h no claim was preferred
under s ection 6 within the period fixed under that section
shall stand extinguished on the publica tion of the notification
under s ection 15 unless, before the publication of such
notification the person claiming them has convinced the
Forest Settlement Officer that he had sufficient cause for not
preferring such claim within that period in which case the

11. See now the Central Act No.30 of 2013. Extinction of rights
not claimed.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
Forest Settlement Officer sha ll proceed to dispose of the
claim in the manner herein before provided.

17. No right of any description shall be acquired by any
person in or over a reserved forest, except by successio n or
under a grant or contract in writing made or entered into by
or on behalf of the Government or any person in whom such
right was vested before the publica tion of the notification
under s ection 15.

18. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, no right
continued under section 11 shall be alienated by way of
grant, sale, exchange, lease or otherwise, without the
sanction of the Government:

Provided that where any such right is continued for the
beneficial enjoyment of any land or building it may be sold
or otherwise alienated with such land or building, without
such sanction.

(2) Any alienation of such right in contravention of this
section shall be null and void.

(3) Subjec t to the provisions of sub -section (1), no
forest produce obtained in exercise of any right continued
under section 11 shall be sold or exchanged except to the
extent provided by the order passed under sub -section (4)
of section 11 in respect thereof.

(4) Any person selling or exchanging any forest
produce in contravention of sub -section (3) shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees.

19. The Divisional Forest Officer may, from time to time
with the previous sanction of the Government, stop any
public or private way or water course in a reserved forest No right ac quired
over reserved
forest except as
herein provided .
Right continued
under section 11
not to be
alienate d without
sanction .
Power to stop
ways and water
courses in
reserved forest s.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 15
where reasonably convenient substitute for the way or water
course so stopped already exi sts or has been provided or
constructed.

20. (1) Any person who –

(a) contravenes the provisions of clause (b) or
sub-section (1) of section 7;

(b) sets fire to a forest notified to be reserved under
burning in such manner as to endanger such forest;

(c) in a reserved forest –

(i) kindles, keeps or carried any fire, except at such
season and subject to such conditions as the Divisional
Forest Officer may, from time to time, specify in this behalf;

(ii) trespasses, pastures cattle or allows cattle to
trespass;

(iii) causes any damage, either wilfully or negligently
in felling or cutting a ny tree or dragging any timber;

(iv) fells, girdles, lops, taps or burns any tree or strips
off the bark or leaves from, or otherwise damages the same;

(v) quarries, stones, burns lime or charcoal;

(vi) collects or subjects to any manufacturing
process, any forest produce;

(vii) clears or breaks up or ploughs any land for
cultivation or for any other purpose;
Penalties for
trespass or
damage in
reserved forest
and acts
prohibited in such
forest .
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
(viii) hunts, shoots, fishes, poisons water or sets traps
or snares;

(ix) damages, alters or removes any wall, ditch
embankment, fence, hedge or railing; or

(x) removes any forest produce;

(d) abet s any of the acts specified in c lauses (a), (b)
and (c), shall in addition to such compensation for damages
caused to the forests as the court may direct to be paid, be
punishable –

(i) in every case where any of the acts aforesaid
relates to sandalwood or red sanderswood with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three
months but which shall not exceed one year and with fine
which shall not exceed ten thousand rupees ;

(ii) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend
to two thousand rupees or with both.

(2) Nothing in sub -section (1) shall be deemed to
prohibit –

(a) any act done in accordance with a ny rule made
under this Act or with the permission in writing of the
Divisional Forest Officer or of an officer authorized by him to
grant such permission ; or

(b) the exercise of any right continued under sub section (3) or sub -section (4) of s ection 11 or created by a
grant or contract in the manner described in section 17.

(3) Where a person contravenes the provisions of sub clause (ii) or sub -clause (vii) of clause (c) of sub -section (1) –
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 17
(i) a forest officer not below the rank of a Ranger;

(ii) a police offic er not below the rank of a Sub Inspector; or

(iii) a revenue officer not below the rank of a Deputy
Tahsildar;

may evict the person from the forest or the land, pertaining
to which the contravention has taken place and remove any
building or other construction or anything grown or
deposited on it :

Provided that before taking any action under this sub section, the officer concerned shall given an opportunity to
the person affected to make any representation against the
action prop osed.

(4) Where any agricultural or other crop is grown on
the land in contravention of sub clause (vii) of clause (c) o f
sub-section (1) or any building or other construction is put
up on such land, any such crop, building or other
construction shall be liable to confiscation by an order o f the
Divisional Forest Officer:

Provided that before making an y order under this
sub-section, the Divisional Forest Officer shall give an
opportunity to the person affected to make a representation
against the order proposed to be made.

21. Where fire is caused wilfully or negligently by any
person or persons in a reserved forest or any portion
thereof, the Government may direct that in such forest or
portion thereof, the exercise of all rights of pasture or to
forest produce shall be suspended for such period as they
think fit.
Suspension of
rights in reserved
forest .
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
22. (1) Every person who exercises any right in a reserved
forest, or who is permitted to take any forest produce from
or to cut and remove timber or to pasture cattle in, such
forest; and

every person who is employed by any such person in
such forest; and

every village officer or person in any village contiguous
to such forest who is employed by the Government;

shall be bound to furnish without delay to the nearest forest
officer or police officer in -charge of the nearest police station
any information he may possess respecting the occurrences
of a fire in, or near, such forest, or the commission for or
intention to commit any forest offence; and shall forthwith
take steps, whether so required by the forest officer or
police officer or not –

(a) to ext inguish any such fire of which he has
knowledge or information;

(b) to prevent any such fire from spreading and shall
assist any forest officer or police officer demanding his aid –

(i) in preventing the commission in such forest of
any forest offen ce; and

(ii) when there is reason to believe that any such
offence has been committed in such forest, in discovering
and arresting the offender.

(2) Who ever, without lawful excuse, fai ls to comply with
the provisions of sub -section (1) shall be puni shable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees or with
both. Persons bound to
assist forest
officer and police
officer .
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 19
23. (1) The Government may, by notification, direct that
from a date to be fixed by such notification any reserved
forest or any portion thereof shall cease to be reserved.

(2) From the date so fixed, such forest or portion shall
cease to be reserved, but the rights, if any, which have been
extinguished therein shall not revive in consequence of such
cessation.

CHAPTER III
Protected Forests

24. (1) The Government may, by notification, declare any
forest or waste land which is the property of the Government
or which is placed under their control for management and
which is not included in a reserved forest, to be a protected
forest and, on such declaration, the provisions of this
Chapter shall apply to such protected forest.

(2) No such notification shall be made in respect of any
land unless t he nature and extent of the rights of the
Government and of private persons in or over such land
have been inquired into and recorded at a survey of
settlement, or in such other manner as may be prescribed
and every such record shall be presumed to be corr ect until
the contrary is proved:

Provided that, where in the case of any land, the
Government consider that such inquiry and record are
necessary, but that the completion thereof will occupy such
length of time, as in the meantime, to endanger the right s of
the Government, the Government may, pending such
inquiry and record, declare such land to be protected forest
but such declaration shall not affect or abridge any existing
rights of individuals or communities.

Power to declare
reserved forest as
no longer
reserved .
Protected F orests .
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
25. (1) Where fire is caused wilfully or negligently by any
person in any protected forest or a portion thereof, the
Government may direct that such forest or portion thereof
be closed against pasture for such period as they think fit.

(2) Whoever pastures cattle or allows cattle to trespass
in protected forest closed against pasture under this section
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees or wi th both.

26. (1) The Government may, by notification: -

(a) declare any trees or class of trees in a protected
forest to be reserved from a date fixed by the notification;

(b) prohibit from a date fixed as aforesaid the
quarrying of stone, or the burring of lime or charcoal or the
collection or subjection to any manufacturing process or
removal of, any forest produce in any such forest and the
breaking up or clearing for cultivation, for building, for
herding cattle or for any other purpose, of any such forest.

(2) A translation into the main language of the locality
of every notification issued under this section shall be
caused to be affixed in a conspicuous place in every town
and village in th e neighbourhood of the protected forest
comprised in the notification .

27. (1) Subject to all rights now vested in individuals and
communities by law or custom or usage having the force of
law, the Government may make rules to regulate the use of
the pasturage or of the natural produce of any protected
forest; and such rules may with respect to such forests –

(a) regulate the occupation, clearing, ploughing or
breaking up of land for cultivation or other purposes; Power to close
forest against
pasture.
Power to issue
notification
reserving trees,
etc.,
Power to make
rules .
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 21
(b) regula te or prohibit the kindling of fire and provide
for the precautions to be taken to prevent and spreading of
fire.

(c) regulate the cutting, sawing, conversion and
removal of trees and timber and the collection and removal
of natural produce;

(d) regu late the quarrying of stone, the boiling of
catechu o r the burning of lime or charcoal;

(e) regulate or prohibit the cutting of grass or the
pasturing of cattle and regulate the payments, if any, to be
made for such cutting or pasturing;

(f) regulate or prohibit hunting, shooting, fishing,
poisoning of water and setting traps or snares;

(g) regulate the sale or free grant of timber or other
natural produce;

(h) specify the fees, royalties, or other payments for
such timber or other natural produ ce and the manner in
which such fees, royalties or other payments shall be levied.

(2) Whoever contravenes any rule made sub -section
(1) shall be punishable –

(i) in every case where such contravention relates to
sandalwood or red sanders wood, with im prisonment for a
term which shall not be less than three months but which
shall not exceed one year and with fine which shall not
exceed ten thousand rupees;

(ii) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months or with fin e which may
extend to two hundred rupees or with both.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
(3) The Government may, by notification and for
reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt any person or
class of persons belonging to the Scheduled Tribes from the
operation of all or any of the rules made under this section.

28. The Government may, by notification, direct that from a
date to be fixed by such notification, any protected forest or
any portion thereof shall cease to be a protected forest.

CHAPTER IV
Control of timber and other forest produce in transit o r
possession.

29. The Government may make rules to regulate -

(i) the floating of timber in the rivers in the State and
the transit of timber and other forest produce by land or
water;

(ii) the possession of teak wood of such value as may
be specified in this behalf, or red sanders wood by any
person residing in any village wit hin a radius of fifteen
kilomet ers of such reserved forest as may be specified in
this behalf.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing power, such rules may -

(a) specify the routes by which alone timber or other
forest produce may be imported, exported or moved into,
from or within the State;

(b) prohibit the import or export or moving of such
timber or other forest produce without a permit from a forest
officer duly authorised to issue the same, or othe rwise than
in accordance with the conditions of such permit, or in the
case of timber, without a transit mark affixed by such officer; Power to declare
protected forest to
cease to be
protected .
Power to make
rules to regulate
the transit and
possession of
timber and other
forest produce .
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 23
(c) provide for the issue, production and return of
such permit or in the case of timber, for affixing of transit
mark and for the payment of the fees therefor;

(d) provide for the stoppage, reporting, examination
and marking of timber or other forest produce in transit in
respect of which there is reason to believe that any money is
payable to the Government on account of the price thereof,
or on account of any duty, fee, royalty, or charge due
thereon or to which it is desirable for the purpose of this Act
to affix a mark;

(e) provide for -

(i) the establishment and regulation of depots and
stations to which such timber or other forest produce shall
be taken by those in -charge of it for examination, or for the
payment of such money or in order that such marks may be
affixed to it, the conditions under which such timber or other
forest produce shall be brought to, stored at and removed
from such depots or stations;

(ii) the setting up of a check -post or the erection of
a barrier or both at such places as the Government may
specify with a view to prevent or check the carrying of
smuggled forest produce; and

(iii) the management and control o f such depots,
stations, check -posts or barriers and for regulating the
appointment and duties of persons employed thereat;

(f) prohibit the closing up or obstructing of the
channel or banks of any river used for the tr ansit of timber or
other forest produce and throwing of grass, brushwood,
branches or leaves into any such channel or river or any act
which may cause such channel or r iver to be closed or
obstructed;
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
(g) Provide for the prevention or removal of any
obstruction of the channel or banks of any such river and for
recovering the cost of such prevention or removal from the
person whose act or neglig ence caused such obstruction;

[(h) prohibit absolutely or regulate, subject to such
conditions in the entire State of 13Telangana or within such
local limits as may be specified, the establishment of pits or
machinery for sawing, converting, cutting, burning,
concealing or marking of timber, the altering or effacing of
any marks on the sam e, of the possession or carrying of
hammers or other imp lements used for ma rking timber; ]

(i) regulate the use of property marks for timber and
the registration of such marks, declare the circumstances in
which the registration of any property marks may be refused
or cancelled; prescribe the time for which such registration
shall hold good, limit the number of such marks that may be
registered by any one person and provide for the levy of
fees for such registration;

(j) provide for the maintenance of accounts in respect
of all classes of sandalwood and red -sanders wood stored
in private lands, depots, markets or factories, for industrial
or commercial purposes;

(k) provide for the protection of bridges, locks or
other public works by regulating the floating of timber and
the storing of such timber or other forest produce on river
banks and authorising the seizure of such timber or other
forest produce floated or stored in contravention of such
rules or by which any damage to such work may have been
caused and the detention and disposal of such timber or

12. Substituted by Act No.35 of 1997.
13. Substituted by G.O.Ms.No.22, E.F.S&T (For.I) Department, dated
13.05.2015.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 25
other forest produce until compensation has been made for
the damage done.

(3) The Government may, by notification, direct that
any rule made under this section shall not apply to such
classes of timber or other forest produce or to such local
area, as may be specified by them.

(4) (a) Whoever contravenes any rule made under th is
section shall be punishable -

(i) in every case, where such contravention relates
to sandal -wood or red -sanders woo d, with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than three months but which
shall not exceed one year and with fine which shall not
exceed ten thousand rupees;

(ii) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend
to two thousand rupees or with both ;

(b) If an offence under this section is committed, after
sunset and before sunrise or after preparation for resistance
to lawful authority or where the offender has been previously
convict ed of a like offence, the m agistrate having jurisdiction
may inflict double the penalty prescribed for such offence.

30. The Government shall not be responsible for any loss
or damage which may occur in respect of any timber or
other forest produce while at a depot or station estab lished
under a rule made under s ection 29 or while detained
elsewhere for the purpose of this Act; and no forest officer
shall be responsible for any such loss or damage unless he
causes such loss or damage negligently, wilfully,
maliciously or fraudulently.
Government and
forest officers not
liable for damage
to forest produce
at depots and
stations .
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
31. Where any accident or emergency involv ing danger to
any property at any d epot or station referred to in s ection 30
occurs, every person employed at such depot or station
shall render assistance to any forest officer or police officer
demanding his aid in preventing or mitigating the damage
or loss to such property.

CHAPER V
Possession of Sandalwood

32. No person shall have in his possession any quantity of
sandalwood in excess of ten kilograms, except under a
licence granted by the Divisional Forest Officer in that
behalf, and except such sandalwood as is marked by a
forest officer in such manner as may be prescribed :

Provided that the Divisional Forest Officer may, by
order, refuse to grant or renew licence to any applicant or
licensee in respect of whom he is satisfied that by reason of
his conviction of an offence under this Act or the rules made
thereunder, or the previous cancellation or suspension of
any licence granted thereunder or the contravention of any
of the requirem ents as to the possession of sandalwood, or
for any other ground that may be prescribed, he is not a fit
person to whom a licence may be granted or renewed
under this section, and every such order shall be
communicated as soon as may be, to the applicant o r the
licensee, as the case may be.

33. The Government may make rules to provide for –

(a) the form and manner in which application for
licence may be made;

(b) the terms and conditions which may be included in
any licence and the fees for the grant of such licence;
Persons
employed at
depots and
stations bound to
aid in case of
accident.
Possession of
sandal -wood
under licence or
mark.
Forms and
conditions of
licence.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 27
(c) the grant of duplicate licence and the renewal of
licence and fees for the same.

34. The Divisional Forest Officer may, after recording the
reasons therefor, cancel or suspend any licence granted
under this Chapter, if he is satisfied that the licensee has
contravened, or failed to comply with, any of the provisions
of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any of the terms
or conditions of the licence, after giving the licensee an
opportunity of making a representation against the action
proposed to be taken.

35. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Divisional Forest Officer, refusing to grant or renew or
cancelling or suspending a lice nce under this Chapter may,
within such time as may be prescribed, appeal to the
Conservator of Forests who may make such order as he
deems fit, after recording the reasons therefor.

(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the
Conservator of Forests in a ppeal preferred under sub section (1) may, within such time as may be prescribed,
prefer a second appeal to the Chief Conservator of Forests
who may make such order as he deems fit, after recording
the reasons therefor.

36. Whoever, in contravention of the provisions of this
Chapter or of any rule made or licence granted thereunder
possesses sandalwood, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three
months but which shall not exceed one year and with fine
which shall not exceed ten thousand rupees.

Power to cancel
or suspend
licence.
Appeal.
Penalties .
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
CHAPTER VI
Of the collection of drift and stranded timber.

37. (1) (a) All timber found adrift, beached, stranded or
sunk ,

(b) All timber bearing marks which have not been
registered in accordance with the rules made under section
or on which the marks have been obliterated, altered or
defaced by fire or otherwise, and

(c) All unmarked timber found in such areas as the
Government may specify ,

shall be deemed to be the property of the Government
unless and until , any person establishes his right and title
thereto as provided in this Chapter.

(2) Such timber may be collected by any forest officer
or by any other person empowered by a rule made under
forest officer may notify as a depot for the reception of drift
timber.

(3) The Government may, by notification, an d for
reasons to be recorded in writing exempt any class of timber
from the provisions of this section.

38. Where any timber is collected by the forest officer or
other person under section 37, he shall immediately report
the same to the Divisional Forest Officer who shall publish a
notice in the District Gazette concerned or where there is no
such Gazette, in t he 14Telangana Gazette, requiring any
person claiming the same to present to him within a period,

14. Substituted by G.O.Ms.No.22, E.F.S&T (For.I) Department, dated
13.05.2015 . Certain kinds of
timber to be
deemed property
of Government
until title th ereto is
proved and may
be collected
accordingly .
Notice to
claimants to dri ft
timber.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 29
not exceeding two months, from the date of such notice, a
written statement of such claim. Such notice shall contain a
description of the timber and the place from which it was
collected and the depot or station at which it is stored.

39. (1) When any statement of claim is presented as
required under s ection 38, the Divisional Forest Officer,
may, after making such enquiry as he thinks fit, either reject
the claim, or deliver the timber to the claimant, after
recording the reasons therefor.

(2) Where such timber is claimed by more than one
person, the Divisional Forest Officer may either deliver the
same to any such person whom he finds to be entitled
thereto after recording the reasons therefor, or may refer the
claimants to the c ourt and retain the timber pending the
receipt of an order from such c ourt for its disposal.

(3) Any person whose claim has been rejected under
this section may, within three months from the date of such
rejection, institute a suit to recover possession of the timber
claimed by him; but no person shall be entitled to any
compensation or cost against the Government or against
any forest officer on account to such rejection, or the
detention or removal of any timber, or the delivery thereof to
any other person.

(4) Save as otherwise provided in this section no such
timber shall be subject to the process of any Civil, Criminal
or Revenue court until it is delivered.

(5) Where the matter is pending before a c ourt under
this section, the Divisional Forest Officer may, with the
permission of the court, instead of retaining the timber
under sub -section (2) sell the timber in public auction and
remit the sale proceeds into the nearest Government
treasury. The court may deal with the proceeds of the sale of Procedure on the
presentation of
claim to such
timber.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
any such timber in the same manner as it might have dealt
with the timber if it had not been sold.

40. Where no statement of claim is presen ted as required
under s ection 38 or where the claimant fails to prefer his
claim in the manner and within the period fixed by the notice
issued under that section or on such claim having been so
preferred by him and having been rejected, fails to institute
a suit to recover possession of such timber within the further
period fixed by section 39, the ownership of such timber
shall vest in the Government free from all encumbrances or
when such timber has been delivered to another person
under that section, in such other person free from all
encumbrances other than those created by him.

41. The Government shall not be responsible for any loss
or damage which may occur in respect of any timber
collected under section 37 and no forest officer shall be
responsible for any such loss or damage unless he causes
such loss or damage negligently, wilfully, maliciously or
fraudul ently.

42. No person shall be entitled to recover possession of
any timber collected under section 37 or delivered under
person entitled to receive it such sum of account thereof as
may be due under any rule made under s ection 43.

43. (1) The Government may make rules to regulate the
following matters, namely: -

(a) the salving, collection and disposal of all timber
referred to in this chapter;

(b) the use and registration of boats used in salving
and collecting timber;
Disposal of
unclaimed timber .
Government and
their officers not
liable for damage
to timber
collected under
Payment to be
made by claimant
before timber is
delivered to him.
Power to make
rules and
prescribe penalty
for contravention
thereof .
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 31
(c) the costs to be paid for salving, collecting,
moving, storing or disposing of such timber;

(d) the use and registration of hammers and other
implements used for marking such timber.

(2) Whoever contravenes any rule made under this
section shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six mont hs, or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.

CHAPTER VII
Penalties and Procedure.

44. (1) Where there is reason to believe that a forest
offence has been committed in respect of any timber or
forest produce, such timber, or forest produce, together with
all tools, ropes, chains, boats, vehicles and cattle used in
committing any such offence may be seized by any forest
officer or police officer.

(2) Every officer seizing any property under this section
shall place on such property or the receptacle, if any, in
which it is contained, a mark indicating that the same has
been so seized and shall, except where the offender agrees
in writing forthwith to get the offence compounded,
[without any unreasonable delay, either produce the
property seized before an officer not below the rank of an
Assistant Conservator of Forests authorised by the
Government in this behalf by notification (hereinafter
referre d to as the authorised officer) or make a report of
such seizure to the Magistrate:]

Provided that where the timber or forest produce with
respect to which such offence is believed to have been

15. Substituted by Act No.17 of 1976. Seizure of
property liable to
confiscation and
procedure
thereupon .
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
committed is the property of the Central or State
Government and the offender is not known, it shall be
sufficient if the officer makes, as soon as may be, a report of
the circumstances to the Divisional Forest Officer.

[(2-A) Where an authorised officer seizes under
sub-section (1) any timber or forest produce or where any
such timber or forest produce is produced before him under
sub-section (2) and he is satisfied that a forest offence has
been committed, in respect thereof, he may order
confiscation of the timber or forest produce so seized or
produced toget her with all tools, ropes, chains, boats or
vehicles used in committing such offence.

(2-B) No order of confiscating any property shall be
made under sub -section (2 -A) unless the person from whom
the property is seized is given, -

(a) a notice in writing informing him of the grounds on
which it is proposed to confiscate such property;

(b) an opportunity of making a representation in
writing within such reasonable time as may be specified in
the notice against the grounds for confiscation; and

(c) a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the
matter.

(2-C) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section
(2-B), no order of confiscation under sub -section (2 -A) of
any tool, rope, chain, boat or vehicle shall be made if the
owner thereof pro ves to the satisfaction of the authorised
officer that it was used in carrying the property without his
knowledge or connivance or the knowledge or connivance
of his agent, if any, or the person in charge of the tool, rope,

16. Inserted by Act No.17 of 1976.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 33
chain, boat or vehicle in commit ting the offence and that
each of them had taken all reasonable and necessary
precautions against such use.

(2-D) Any forest officer not below the rank of a
Conservator of Forests empowered by the Government in
this behalf by notification, may within thi rty days from the
date of the order of confiscation by the authorised officer
under sub -section (2 -A) either suo motu or on application
call for and examine the record of that order and may make
such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made and pass
such o rders as he may think fit:

Provided that no order, prejudicial to any person, shall
be passed without giving him an opportunity of being heard.

(2-E) Any person aggrieved by an order passed under
sub-section (2 -A) or sub -section (2-D) may, within thirt y
days from the date of communication to him of such order,
appeal to the District Court having jurisdiction over the area
in which the property has been seized ; and the District
Court shall after giving an opportunity to the parties to be
heard, pass such order as it may think fit and the order of
the District Co urt so passed shall be final.]

(3) Any forest officer not below the rank of a Forester,
who or whose subordinate has seized any tools, ropes,
chains, boats, vehicles or cattle under sub -section (1)
[and where he makes a report of such seizure to the
Magistrate under sub -section (2)] may release the same on
the execution by the owner thereof a bond for the
production of the property so released, if a nd when so
required before the m agistrate.

17. Inserted by Act No.17 of 1976.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
(4) Upon the receipt of any rep ort under sub -section
(2), the m agistrate shall, except where the offence is
compounded, take such measures as may be necessary for
the trial of the accused and the disposal of the property
according to law.

(5) The property seized under this section, shall be
kept in the custody of the forest officer not below the rank of
a Forest Guard or the Village Headman until the
compensation for compounding the offence is paid or until
an order of the m agistrate directing its disposal is received.

[45. Where a person is convicted of a forest offence, the
Court sentencing him shall order confiscation to the
Government of timber or forest produce in respect of which
such offence was committed and of any tool, boat, vehicle,
vessel or other conveyance or any other article used in
committing such offence except where an order of
confiscation, has already been p assed in respect thereof
under s ection 44. ]

46. When the trial of any forest offence is concluded, any
timber or forest produce in respect of which such offence
was committed shall, if it is the property of the Central or
State Government or if it is confiscated, be taken
possession of by or under the authority of the Divisional
Forest Officer , or and in any other case, may be disposed of
in such manner as the Court having jurisdiction may, by
order, direct.

47. Where the m agistrate is of opinion that a forest offence
was committed but the offender is not known or cannot be
found, he may on an application made in this behalf order
the property, in respect of which the offence was committed

1976. Timber , forest
produce , tools
etc., when liable
to confiscation.
Disposal on
conc lusion of tr ial
for forest offence
of timber or fores t
produce in
respect of which it
was commi tted.
Procedure when
offender is not
known or cannot
be found.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 35
and which was seized, to be confisc ated and taken
possession of by or under the authority of the Divisional
Forest Officer or to be ma de over to any person whom the
magistrate considers to be entitled to the same:

Provided that be fore making any such order the
magistrate shall cause a not ice of any application made
under this section to be served upon any person who, he
has reason to believe, is interested in the property seized, or
shall publish such notice in such manner as he thinks fit:

Provided further that no such order shall be ma de until
the expiration of thirty days from the date of seizing such
property, or without hearing the person if any, claiming any
right thereto, and the evidence, if any, which he may
produce in support of his claim.

48. (1) Except where a forest of fence has been
compounded, the m agistrate may direct the sale of any
property s eized under s ection 44, which is subject to
speedy and natural decay, and if in the opinion of the officer
seizing such property, it is not possible to obtain the orders
of the m agistrate in time, such officer may sell th e property
himself, remit the s ale proceeds into the nearest
Government treasury and make a report of such seizu re,
sale and remittance to the m agistrate, and thereupon the
Magistrate shall take such measures as may be necessary
for the trial of the accused.

(2) The m agistrate may deal with the proceeds of the
sale of any property held under sub -section (1) in the same
manner as he might have dealt with the property if it had not
been sold.

49. Any person claiming to be interested in the property
seized under section 44 may, within one month from the
date of any order passed un der s ection 45, section 46 or Procedure in
regard to
perishable
property seized
under section 44.
Appeal from
orders under
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
which a n appeal from the order of the m agistrate ordinarily
lies, the appeals shall be disposed of in the manner
provided by the 19Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

50. [(1) Where an order of confiscation of any property
passed under sub -section (2 -A) or sub -section (2 -D) of
portion of such property , such property or the portion
thereof , as the case may be, shall vest in the Governmen t
free from all encumbrances. ]

[(2)] Where an order for the confiscation any property
was passed under s ection 45 or sectio n 47 and the period
limited by s ection 49 for presenting a n appeal from such
order has elapsed, and no such appeal was presented, or
where, on such an appeal being presented, the appellate
court confirms such order in respect of the whole or a
portion of such property, such property or portion, as the
case may be shall vest in the Government free from all
encumbrances.

51. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to prevent the
Divisional Forest Officer from directing at any time the
immediate release of any property seized under section 44,
and the withdrawal of any charge made in respect of such
property in accordance with the provision of [section 494
of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 ]:

19. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of
1974).
20. Sub -section (1) inserted by Act No.17 of 1976.
21. Existing section 50 renumbered as sub -section (2) by Act No.17 of
1976.
22. See now section 321 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(Central Act 2 of 1974). Property when to
vest in
Gover nment.
Saving of power
to release
property seized.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 37
Provided that where a report is made to the Magistrat e
of the property seized under s ection 44 the Divisional Forest
Officer shall not release the property without the consent in
writing of such m agistrate, or witho ut previous intimation to
such m agistrate.

52. Whoever, with intent to cause damage or injury to the
public or to any person, or to cause wrongful gain as
defined in the Indian Penal Code -

(a) knowingly counterfeits upon any timber or standing
tree, a mark used by any forest officer to indicate that such
timber or tree is the property of the Central or State
Government or of some person, or that it may lawfully be cut
or removed by some person, or

(b) unlawfully affixes to any timber or standing tree, a
mark used by any forest officer, or

(c) alters, defaces or obliterates any such mark placed
on any timber or standing tree by or under the authority of
any forest officer, or

(d) alters, moves, dest roys or defaces any boundary
mark of any forest or any land to which any provisions of
this Act apply,

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees or with both.

53. (1) Any forest officer not below the rank of a Forest
Guard or police offi cer may, without orders from a
magistrate and without a warrant arrest and detain in
custody any person if the officer knows or has reason to
belie ve that such person is committing or has committed
any forest offence and, if such person refuses to give his Pena lty for
counterfe iting
marks on trees
and timber and for
altering boundary
marks.
Power to arrest
without warrant.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
name and residence, or gives a name residence which there
is reason to believe to be false or if there is reason to believe
that he will abscond.

(2) Every person arrested and detained in custody
under this section shall be informed, as soon as may be, of
the grounds for such arrest and detention and shall be
produced before the nearest m agist rate within a period of
twenty -four hours of such arres t excluding the time
necessary for the journey f rom the place of arrest to the
court of the m agistrate; and no such person shall be
detained in custody beyond the said per iod without the
authority of a m agistrate.

54. Any forest officer not below the rank of Forester, who
or whose subordinate has arrested any person under the
provisions of s ection 53, may release such person on his
executing a bond to appear, if an y when so required, before
the m agistrate or before the officer -in-charge of the nearest
police station.

55. Any forest officer or police officer who vexatiously or
frivolously seizes any property on pretence of seizing
property liable to confiscation under this Act, or who
vexatiously or frivolously arrests any person, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees, or with both.

56. Every forest officer and police officer shall prevent, and
may take necessary steps for the purpose of preventing the
commission of any forest offence.

Power to release
on bond a person
arrested.
Punishment of
wrongful seizure
or arrest.
Power to prevent
commission of
offence.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 39
57. Any m agistrate of the first class specially empowered in
this behalf by the Government may try summarily under the
[Code of Criminal Procedure , 1898 ] any forest offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six
months, or with fine not exceeding five hundred rupees, or
with both.

58. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to bar the
prosecution of any person unde r any other law for any act or
ommission which constitutes a forest offence, or from being
liable under such other law to any higher punishment or
penalty than that provided by this Act, or the rules made
thereunder:

Provided that no person shall be prosecuted and
punished for the same offence more than once.

[58-A. An order of confiscation under sub -section (2-A) or
sub-section (2 -D) of s ection 44 shall not be deemed to bar
the imposition of any other penalty to which the person from
whom the property is seized is liable under this Act.]

59. (1) Any forest officer, specially empowered in this
behalf by the Government may accept a s compensation
from any person who committed or in respect of whom it
can be reasonably inferred that he has committed , any
forest offence, other than an offence under section 52 or

(i) a sum of money not exceeding fifty rupees where
such offence is of a trivial nature;

23. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of
1974).
1976. Power to try
offences
summarily .
Operation of other
laws not barred.
Order of
confiscation not to
bar imposition of
other penalty.
Power to
compound
offences.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
(ii) a sum of money which shall not in any case be
less than the value of the forest produce, or more than four
times such value as estimated by such forest officer, in
addition to the value of the forest produce, where such
offence involves any forest produce which in the opinion of
the forest officer , may be released;

(iii) a sum of money which shall not in any case be
less th an the value of the forest produce or more than four
times such value as estimated by such forest officer, where
such offence involves forest produce which in the opinion of
the forest officer should be retained by the Government.

(2) On receipt of the s um of money referred to in
sub-section (1) by such officer ,-

(i) the accused person, if in custody, shall be
discharged;

(ii) the property seized shall, if it is not to be so
retained, be released; and

(iii) no further proceedings shall be taken against
such person or property.

60. Where, in any proceedings taken under this Act, or in
consequence of anything done under this Act a question
arises as to whether any forest produce is the property of
the Central or State Government, such produce shall be
presumed to be the property of the Central or State
Government as the case may be, until the contrary is
proved.

Presum ption that
timber or forest
produce belongs
to the Central or
State
Government .
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 41
CHAPTER VIII
Cattle Trespass

61. (1) Cattle trespassing in a reserved forest or in a
protected forest shall be deemed to be cattle doing damage
to a public plantation within the meaning of section 11 of the
Cattle Trespass Act , 1871, and may be seized and
impounded as such by any forest officer or police officer.

(2) The Government may, by notification, direct that in
lieu of the fines fixed by section 12 of the Act referred to in
sub-section (1), there shall be levied, in all or any of the
areas to which this Act applies, for each goat or kid
impounded under sub -section (1), such fine not exceeding
rupees five as they think fit.

CHAPTER IX
Powers of Forest Officers

62. (1) (a) The Government may, by notification and
subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified
therein, invest any forest officer not below the rank of a
Ranger with all or any of the following powers, namely: -

(i) to enter upon any land and to survey, demarcate
and make a map of the same:

Provided that no such demarcation shall take away
or abridge the right of any person in or over the land;

(ii) to hold enquiries into forest offences, and in the
course of such enquiries to receive and record evidence;

(iii) to accept compensation for f orest offences
under section 59;
Cattle Trespass
Act, 1871 to
apply.
Government may
invest forest
officers with
certain powers .
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
(b) The Government may by notification invest any
forest o fficer not below the rank of [a Forest Range Officer]
with all or any of the following powers, namely: -

(i) power of a civil c ourt to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of documents and material
objects;

(ii) to search or to issue a search warrant which may
be executed in the manner provided in the [Code o f
Criminal Procedure, 1898 ].

(2) The Government may, in like manner, withdraw any
powers invested under sub -section (1).

(3) Any evidence recorded under item (ii) of clause (a)
of sub -section (1) shall be admissible in any subsequent trial
of the allege d offender before a Magistrate, if it has been
taken in the presence of the accused person and recorded
in the manner provided by 27section 355, s ection 356 or

63. All forest officers shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

64. Any forest officer not below the rank of a Forester may,
at any time enter and inspect any private forest or land
within his jurisdiction for the purpose of ascertaining
whether there has been contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder or for
the purpose of securing compliance with any such
provision.

25. Substituted by Act No.35 of 1997.
26. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of
1974)
27. See now section 274, section 275 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974). Forest officers
deemed public
servants.
Power of entry
and inspection.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 43
65. No suit or criminal prosecution shall lie against any
public servant for anything done or omitted to be done in
good faith in pursuance of this Act.

CHAPTER X
Miscellaneous

66. (1) The Government may suo motu or on application
made to them, call for and examine the record of any forest
officer in respect of any proceeding, not being a proceeding
in respect of which a suit, an appeal or a pplication or a
reference to a c ourt is provided under this Act, t o satisfy
themselves as to the regularity of such proceeding, or the
correctness, legality or propriety of any decision passed or
order made therein; and if in any case, it appears to the
Government that any such decision or order should be
modified, annul led, reversed or remitted for reconsideration,
they may pass orders accordingly:

Provided that every application to the Government for
the exercise of the powers under this section shall be
preferred within ninety days from the date on which the
proceedi ng, decision or order to which the application
relates was communicated to the applicant.

(2) No order prejudicial to any person shall be passed
under sub -section (1) unless such person has been given
an opportunity of making his representation.

(3) Th e Government may suspend the execution of any
proceeding, decision or order pending the exercise of their
power under sub -section (1) in respect thereof.

67. The Government may, by notification exempt for
reasons to be recorded in writing, any area from all or any of
the provisions of this Act , but not so as to effect anything
done, or any offence committed, or any fine imposed or Indemnity for acts
done in good
faith.
Revision.

Power of
Government to
exempt any area
from the
provisions of the
Act.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
penalty levied, or any proceedings commenced in such
place before such exemption, and may in like manner vary
or cancel such notification.

68. (1) The Government may by notification make rules to
carry out all or any of the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for -

(a) declaring by which forest officer or class of forest
officers, the powers conferred or duties imposed by or
under this Act on a forest officer shall be exercised or
performed;

(b) regulating the procedure to be followed by the
Forest Settlement Officer;

(c) regulating the rewards to be paid to officers or
informers from the proceeds of fines and confiscations
under this Act, or from the Government treasury;

(d) regulating or prohibiting, hunting, shooting,
carrying firearms, fishing, poisoning of water or setting traps
or snares on or from any public road passing through or
situated within a distance of thirty met ers from any forest;

(e) the preservation, reproduction and disposal of
trees and timber belonging to the Government;

(f) any other matter which is to be or may be
prescribed.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall, immediately
after it is made, be laid before each House of the State
Legislature, if it is in session and if it is not in session, in the
session immediately following for a total period of fourteen Power of
Government to
make rules.
[Act No. 1 of 1967] 45
days which may be comprised in one session, or in two
successive sessions, and if, before the expiration of the
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately
following , both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or in the annulment of the rule, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form, or shall
stand annulled, as the case m ay be; so however that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

(4) Any person contravening any rule under this Act, for
the contravention of which no special penalty is pr ovided
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one month or with fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees or with both:

Provided that no prosecution under this sub -section
shall be instituted without the previous sanction of the
Divisional Forest Officer.

69. The Government may, by notification delegate any of
the powers conferred on them by Sections 18, 19, 21, 24, 25
and sub -section (2) of section 61, to the Chief Conservator
of Forests, or to such other officer or authority as they deem
fit.

70. (1) All monies, o ther than fines imposed by the
magistrate, duly ascertained and payable to the
Government under this Act, or any rule made thereu nder, or
on account of timber or forest produce or of expenses
incurred in the execution of this Act in respect of timber or
forest produce or under any contract relating to timber or
forest produce including any sum recoverable thereunder
for the breach t hereof or in consequences of the
cancellation or under the terms of a notice relating to the
sale of timber or forest produce by auction or by invitation of
tenders issued by or under the authority of a Divisional Government may
delegate powers.
Recovery of
money due to
Government.
[Act No. 1 of 1967]
Forest Officer and all compensations award ed to
Government under this Act including the compensation
under section 59 may, if not paid when due, be recovered
as if it were an arrear of land revenue.

(2) Where the money referred to in sub -section (1) is
payable for, or in respect of any forest produce, the amount
thereof shall be deemed to be a first charge on that
produce; and , if the amount be not paid when due, the
produce may be taken possession of by or under the
authority of the Divisional Forest Officer, and may be
retained until such amo unt is paid, or the forest officer may
sell the produce by public auction, and proceeds of the sale
shall be applied first in discharging such amount.

(3) The surplus, if any shall be paid to the person
entitled thereto.

71. Whenever it appears to the Government that any land
is required for any of the purpose of this Act, such land shall
be deemed to be needed for a public purpose within the
meaning of the 28Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

72. (1) T he Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Forest Act ,
1882, and the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Forest Act,
F., are hereby repealed.

(2) Upon such repeal, the provisions of section s 8 and
of the 29Telangana General Clauses Act, 1891 shall apply.

* * *

28. See now the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (Central Act 30 of
2013).
29. Adapted as Telangana General Clause s Act, 1891, vide.
G.O.Ms.No.45, Law (F) Department, dated 01.06.2016 . Land required
under this Act t o
be deemed to be
needed for public
purpose under the
Land Acquisition
Act, 1894.
Repeal.