an act of
mismanagement and action shall be taken against the
private institution under this Act accordingly.

25. (1) The manager nominated under se ction 24 shall be
responsible for managing and conducting the affairs of the
private institution in accordance with the provisions of this
Act and rules or orders made thereunder and for
maintaining the properties thereof in proper and good
condition.

36. Added by Act No.27 of 1987.
37. Omitted by Act No.27 of 1987. Duties of
managers of
private
institutions.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(2) It shall be the duty of the manager to maintain such
records and accounts of the institution and in such manner
as may be prescribed.

(3) The manager shall afford all assistance and facilities
as may be necessary or reasonably required for the
inspectio n of the institution and its records and accounts by
such officer as may be prescribed or authorised by the
competent authority in this behalf.

(4) Before the end of April in each year, the manager of
every private institution shall furnish to the compet ent
authority a statement containing a list of all movable and
immovable properties of the institution with such other
particulars as may be prescribed.

26. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no private
institution shall be closed down or discontinued, unless a
notice of not less than one academic year expiring with the
end of any academic year and indicating the intention to do
so, has been given by th e manager to the officer authorised
by the competent authority in t his behalf.

(2) If any manager fails to give notice as required under
sub-section (1 ), he shall, on c onviction , be punished with
fine which may extend to [five thousand rupees ] or with
simple imprisonment which may extend to [one year ] or
with both and with a fine of [rupees one hundred ] for every
day of further default.

27. (1) In the event of the [private institution other than a
registered school] being closed down or discontinued or its
recognition being withdrawn, the manager shall hand over
or cause to be handed over to the competent authority the

38. Substituted by Act No.27 of 1987. Private institution
not to be closed
down, etc.,
without sufficient
notice.
Manager to hand
over properties,
records etc., to
competent
authority on
closure, etc., of
private
institutions.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 35
custody of all the properties, records and accounts of the
institution in his possession.

(2) (a) Where the competent authority is resisted in, or
prevented from, obtaining the custody of properties, records
or accounts of the institution by such manager, any judicial
magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction shall, on an
application made by the competent authority, by order, after
notice to the manager, direct the handin g over of the
custody of such properties, records or accounts of the
institution to the competent authority within the time
specified in such order.

(b) Where the manager fails to hand over the custody
of the properties, records or accounts within the time
specified in the order of the magistrate under clause (a), he
shall be punished with impriso nment which ma y extend to
[one year ] or with fine which may extend to [five
thousan d rupees ] or with both, and the magistrate shall
cause the custody of the properties, records or accounts to
be handed over to the competent authority taking such
police assistance as may be necessary.

(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to a minority
educational institution and to a private institution under the
management of a charitable or religious institution,
charitable or religious endowment and a wakf.

28. (1) Notwithstanding anything in any law for the time
being in force, no sale, mortgage, lease, pledge, charg e or
transfer of p ossession in respect of any property of a
[private institutio n other than a registered school] shall be
made or created except with the previous permission in
writing of the competent authority on an application made in
this behalf.

39. Substituted by Act No.27 of 1987. Restriction on
alienation of
property of private
institution.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(2)(a) No permission applied for under sub -section (1)
shall be refused b y the competent authority except where
the grant of such permission will in its opinion, adversely
affect the working of the institution.

(b) The competent authority shall pass an order either
granting or refusing permission applied for, within a period
of sixty days from the date of receipt of the application.

(3) Any person aggrieved by an order refusing
permission under sub -section (2) may, in such manner and
within such time as may be prescribed, appeal to the
prescribed authority.

(4) Any transaction made in contravention of sub section (1) shall be null and void.

29. Where any manager incurs debts for the purpose of
running an educational institution without proper
authoris ation by the management of such institu tion and
where it is found by the competent authority after making an
enquiry that the monies received through such debts have
not been utilised for running the institution it shall be the
personal liability of such m anager to discharge the said
debts.

30. (1) There shall be parent -teacher association for e very
educational institution other than an adult education al
centre.

(2) The composition and functions of the parent teacher association shall be in accordance with such rules
as may be prescribed.

31. (1) The Government or the competent authority may
authorise an y officer not below such rank as may be
prescr ibed to inspect any educati onal institution in the State. Liability of
manager to repay
debts incurred in
certain cases.
Parent - teacher
association.
Inspection of
educational
institutions.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 37
(2) The officer authorised under sub -section (1) shall
exerc ise general powers of inspection over the working of
the educational institution.

(3) The manager and the employees of the educational
institution shall at all reasonable times be bound to afford to
the aforesaid officer all such assistance and facilities as may
be required for the purpose of such inspection.

(4) The manager shall comply with such directions or
suggestions as may be given by the competent autho rity on
the report of the aforesaid officer:

Provided that the manager aggrieved by any such
direction or suggestion may appeal, within thirty days from
the date of receipt of such direction or suggestion to the
prescribed authority whose decision on suc h appeal shall
be final.

32. (1) (a) On or after the commencement of this Act, no
tutorial institution shall be started without prior registration;
and an application for such registration shall be made in the
prescribed manner and to the prescribed officer.

(b) In the case of a tutorial institution in existence at
the commencement of this Act, any person or body of
persons managing such institution shall, within ninety days
from such commencement, make an ap plication for
registration to the prescribed officer and if no such
application is so made or if the prescribed officer
communicates to him an order refusing to register the
institution under sub-section (2), the person or body of
persons managing such ins titution shall no t run the
institution from the date of expiration of the ninety days
aforesaid or the date of communication of such order of
refusal, as the case may be.
Registration of
tutorial
institutions.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section (1),
the prescribed officer may, after satisfying himself whether
or not the application contains all the prescribed particulars
and that the tutorial institution complies with the minimum
requirements prescribed in regard to the sanitary conditions
of the premises and the qualifications of the teaching staff,
either register the tutorial institution in a register to be
maintained for the purpose or refuse to register, and shall,
where he so registers the institution, issue in the prescribed
form a registration certificate in the name of the tutorial
institution.

(3) The person or body of pers on managing every
tutorial institution so registered, shall submit to the
prescribed officer within two months after the end of every
academic year, an annual report regarding t he coaching
facilitie s provided by it d uring the academi c year.

(4) The person or body of persons managing every
tutorial institution so registered shall give intimation to the
prescribed officer and the District Education Officer, of any
change in any of the particulars fur nished under sub-section
(1), or of closure of the institution, in such form, in such
manner and within such time as may be prescribed, and the
prescribed officer shall on receipt of such intimation, amend
the register referred to in sub -section (2) and th e registration
certificate wherever necessary, or as the case may be,
cancel the certificate, and notify the same.

(5) Where the person or body of persons managing
any tutorial institution has, in the opinion of the prescribed
officer, contravened any of the conditions subject to which
the registration certificate is issued to such person or body
of persons managing such institution, the prescribed officer
may, after giving the person or body of persons an
opportunity of making his representation, cancel the
registration certificate and remove the name of the institution
[Act No.1 of 1982] 39
from the register referred to in sub -section (2) and notify the
same.

(6) Any person who runs a tutorial institution in
contravention of clause (b) of sub -section ( 1) or who
establishes and manages a tutorial institution without
obtaining a registration certificate under sub -section (2) or
who after the registration certificate issued to him, under that
sub-section having been cancelled continues to run such
institution, shall be punished [with imprison ment for a term
which shall not be less than six months but which may
extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one
thous and rupees or with both :]

Provided that for a second or any subsequent offence
under this section, he shall be punished with imprisonm ent
for a ter m [which shall not be less than one year but which
may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees or with both :]

[Provided further that the Court c onvicting a person
under this section shall also order the closure of the tutorial
institution with respect to which the offence is committed. ]

33. (1) There shall be registered society to establish and
maintain abhyudaya pradhamika pathasalas in the state of
effec ting qua litative improvement in pri mary educat ion to be
called the Abhyudaya Pradhamika Vidya Samsth a.

(2) There shall b e a registered society t o establish and
maintain residential educational institutions in the State to
be called the 42Telangana Residential Educational
Institutions Society .

40. Substituted by Act No. 27 of 1987.
41. Second proviso to sub -section (6) added by Act No.27 of 1987.
42. Substituted by G.O.Ms.No.15, Higher Education, (TE) Department,
dated 23.04.2015. Abhyudaya
Pradhamika Vidya
Samstha and
Residential
Educational
Institutions
Society.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(3) The composition of the governing body of each of
the said societies and its powers and functions shall,
notwithstanding anything in any law for the time being in
force, be such as may be prescribed.

(4) Where the Government are of opinion that all or any
of the educational institutions established and maintained
by the said society be taken over, they may, after giving one
month‟s notice to the society to make any representation;
direct by notification that the management of the said
educational institution shall, with effect on and from the date
specified therein, vest in the Government without d etrime nt
to the interests of the employees of the said institution.

[CHAPTER – VI-A
Registered Sc hools.

33-A. For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression
“registered school ” shall mean a school recognised under
section -21 but not receiving aid from the Government.

33-B. (1) The competent authority shall, from time to time,
conduct a survey as to identify the need for establishing
registered schools un der its jurisdiction and then notify in
the prescribed manner through the local news papers
calling for applications from the educational agencies
desirous of establishing the school to be registered in the
manner herein after provided.

(2) In pursuance of the notification under sub -section
(1), any registered bo dy of persons intending to, -

(a) establish a registered school;

43. Chapter - VI-A inserted by Act No. 27 of 1987. Definition.
Permission for
establishment of
registered
schools.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 41
(b) open higher classes in a registered school
imparting pre -primary or primary education; or

(c) upgrade any such school into a high school;

may make an application, within such period in such
manner and to such authority as may be notified for the
grant of permission therefor.

(3) The authority empowered to grant permission under
sub-section (2) may, after satisfying that the conditions
prescribed for the grant of permission are fulfilled, grant the
permission and register the school in such manner as may
be prescribed or refuse such permission after giving
reasons there for and where the school is so registered a
certificate to that effect may be issued in the name of the
school.

33-C. (1) The management of every private institution
existing on the date of commencement of the Andhra
Pradesh Education (Amendment) Act, 1987 desirous of
registering the school in accordance with the provision s of
this Chapter may make an application for regist ration in
accordance with the prov ision s of section 33 -B to the
competent authority within sixty days from such
commencement and if no application is made within the
said period or where the application is rejected, the
institution shall continue to be a private institution.

33-D. Where the competent authority is of the opinion that
the management of a registered school has failed to fulfill all
or any of the conditions of regist ration under section 33 -B or
the rules made thereunder, it may after giving a notice not
less than thirty days to the manager of such school cancel
the registration of the school and the certificate granted
under section 33 -B.
Special Provision
in respect of
existing schools.
Cancellatio n of
registration of the
Registered
Schools.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
33-E. The teaching and non -teaching s taff of the registered
schools shall be entitled to receive such salaries and
allowances and shall be subject to such conditions of
service as may be prescribed.

33-F. The registered school shall follow the same syllabi,
text books and hand books and maintain the same records
and registers as may be followed and maintained by the
recognised schools.

33-G. The management of every registered school shall
constitute an advisory body for the pre -primary, primary and
upper primary classes and for secondary school classes
sepa rately and the composition and the c onstitution of such
advisory body shall be such as may be prescribed.

33-H. The Advisory B ody shall perform the following
functions, namely: -

(i) to advise the management in evolving the fee
structure;

(ii) to evolve the procedure for the admission of the
students;

(iii) to evolve the procedure for accounting an d auditing
the accounts of the registered school;

(iv) to suggest guidelines for the administration of the
school without interfering with the minority character of the
minority institutions;

(v) to approve the annual report;

(vi) to subject to the provisions of section -33-E evolve
the procedure for the recruitment and conditions of s ervice Conditions of
service of staff.
Maintenance of
registers and
following of
syllabus, etc.
Advisory Body.
Functions of the
Advisory Body.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 43
of the teach ing and non -teaching staff of the registered
school .

33-I. No registered school shall be entitled to receive gr antin-aid or any other financial assistance from the Government
for its management. The existing recognised schools which
are receiving the grant -in-aid shall continue to receive such
aid only until they are registered under section 33 -B.

33-J. The properties of any private institution registered as
registered school, like building, furniture, library, laboratory,
equipment, playground, aids, endowments and bank
balances, shall continue to be the properties of such
institution e ven after it is registered under section 33 -B.

33-K. (1) The transfer certificate in respect of any student of
a registered school shall be in such form and issued in such
manner as may be prescribed.

(2) Students of any recognised school may seek
admission in or transfer from any such school to any
registered school and vice -versa. The transfer certificate
issued by the registered school shall be counter signed by
the competent authority in such manne r as may be
prescribed.

33-L. Where the Government have prescribed any common
examination or any public examination for student
evaluation, the students studying in the registered schools
shall appear for those examination subject to satisfying the
rules made in this behalf and the conditions prescribed by
the Commissioner for Government Examinations.

33-M. Where the competent authority selects any registered
school as a centre for the conduct of the VII Class, District
Common Examinatio n, or the X Class Public Examination, Grants.
Properties of
registere d
schools.
Transfer certificate
to be counter signed.
Examination for
the students of
registered school.
Registered
schools to make
arrangements for
conducting of
examination.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
the management of the school shall extend all the facilities
for the smooth conduct of the examination.

33-N. It shall be the responsibility of the management of a
registered school to submit every year before such date and
to such authority as may be prescribed an annual report
relating to the administration of the school and such other
information and statistical data as may be prescribed.

33-O. The Government shall have the right to visit or cause
an inspection to be made by such person or persons as
they may direct for a specified purpose of the registered
school and also to cause an enquiry to be made into the
matters connected therewith. ]

CHAPTER VII
Education funds of local authorities.

34. In this Chapter, the expression “local authority ” does
not include a gram panchayat.

35. (1) There shall be constituted for each loca l authority
an education fund, to which shall be credited, -

(a) an annual contribution from the general funds of
such local authority not being less th an a minimum fixed by
the Government in that behalf;

(b) all sums granted to such local authority by the
Government for the purpose of providing educational
facilities within its jurisdiction;

(c) all fines and penalties levied within the jurisdiction
of such local authority under the provisions of this Act;
Duties of the
management of
the registered
school.
Definition.
Education fund of
local authority. Inspection.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 45
(d) all income derived from any endowment or other
property owned or managed by such local authority for the
benefit of education;

(e) all tution fees, if any, collected in educational
institutions managed by such local authority ;

(f) all other sums of money which may be contributed
to or received by, such local authority for the purposes of
this Act.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the
time being in force, the education fund constituted under
this section shall be kept separately and shall not be
merged with the general revenues of the local authority
concerned and it shall be used exclusively for purposes of
education.

36. (1) The education fund constit uted under section 35
shall be deposited in Government treasury.

(2) All expenses incurred on education by the local
autho rity concerned shall be paid out of the said fund.

(3) All orders or cheques to be drawn upon the fund
shall be signed by the chie f executive officer of the local
authority or by such person as he may authorise in writing to
sign on his behalf.

(4) So far as the funds to the credit of the local
authority concerned permit, the treasury shall pay -

(a) all orders or cheques signed in ac cordance with
sub-section (3);

(b) all payments made or expenses incurred by the
Government on behalf of the local authority by or under the Education fund
where to be
deposited and
how to be drawn
upon.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
provisions of this Act, provided that the local authority has
given previous permission in writing to the treasury to debit
such expenses to the fund without the issue of any order or
cheque.

37. (1) Any municipal council may, with the previous
sanction of the Government and shall, if so directed by
them, levy within its jurisdiction, taxes for the purpose of this
Act, at such rates as may be considered necessa ry, as an
addition to the taxation levied in the municipality under the
44Telangana Municipalities Act, 1965, under the head of
property tax or profession tax or unde r both these heads.

Explanation :- In construing the expression “taxation
levied” occurring in this sub -section exemptions granted
under sub -section (2), sub -section (3), sub -section (4) or
sub-section (5) of section 88 of the 44Telangana
Municipalities Act, 1965, shal l not be taken into account .

(2) Any gram panchayat may, with the previou s
sanction of the Government and shall, if so directed by
them, levy within the area under its jurisdiction or part
there of, taxes for the purposes of this Act, at such rates as
may be considered necessary, as addition to the taxation
levied in such area or part under the law for the time being
in force governing gram panchayats under all or any of the
following heads, namely, land cess or local cess, profession
tax and house tax.

38. (1) The rates of levy of any tax under section 37 shall
be determined –

44. Adapted in G.O.Ms.No.142, MA & UD (F2) Department, dated
29.10.2015. Levy of taxes.
Act 6 of 1965.
Rate of levy of
taxes under
[Act No.1 of 1982] 47
(a) by the municipal council or gram panchayat with
the previous sanction of the Government in case the tax is
levied by it of its own motion; and

(b) by the Government, in case the tax is levied at
their direction:

Provided that rates of any such tax levied as addition to
the taxation under the head of profession tax, shall be
subject to the limits specifie d in any law for the time being in
force governing the municipalities or gram panchayats, as
the case may be, or prescribed by rules made under this
Act:

Provided further that the rates of any such tax levied by
municipal council or gr am panchayat as an addition to the
taxation under the head of property tax shall not exceed five
per centum per annum in the case of properties taxed on
their annual rental value, one fourth per centum per a nnum
in the case of properties taxed on their capital value and four
rupees per annum for every three hundred square meters or
part there of in the case of properties taxed on their extent:

Provided also that the rates of any such tax levied by a
gram panchayat as an addition to the taxation under th e
head of land cess or local cess shall not exceed thirty seven
paise in the rupee of the annual rental value of the land.

(2) The municipal council or gram panchayat may, with
the previous sanction of the Government, and shall if so
directed by them, al ter the rates of levy of any s uch tax.

39. (1) Every tax levied in any are a under any head of
taxation mentioned in section 37 shall be deemed to be an
addition to a tax levied under the same head in such area
under the law for the time being in force governing the
municipalities or gram panchayats, as the case may be, and Assessment and
realization of
taxes.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
all the provisions of such law relating to the incidence
assessment or rea lisation of such tax or in any manne r
connected there with shall be appli cable accordingly:

Provided that the Government m ay direct that the said
provisions shall apply subject to su ch modifications and
restrictions, as may be prescribed.

(2) In particular, any such tax levied in any area within
the jurisdiction of a gram panchayat under any head of
taxation, other than land cess or local cess shall be realised
by such authority as may be prescribed as an addition to a
tax levied under the same head under the law for the time
being in force governing gram panchayats. Out of the
proceeds of the tax so realised, such percentage as may be
prescribed shall be deducted towards the collection charges
and the balance shall be paid by such authority into the
Government treasury.

40. (1) On or before the prescribed date, every local
authority for which an education fund has been const ituted
under section 35 shall submit to the Government through
the Director in such form as may be prescribed a budget for
the ensuing financial year showing the income and
expenditure relating to such fund.

(2) The Government may pass such orders as they
think fit in respect of the budget and the local authority
concerned shall carry out such orders.

41. The accounts of the education fund of each local
authority shall be examined and audited by such officer as
may be appointed by the Government and the local
authority concerned shall carry out any instructions which
the Government may issue on the audit report.

Budget of
education fund.
Audit of accounts
of education fund.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 49
CHAPTER VIII.
Grant -In-Aid

42. The Government shall, within the limits of its economic
capacity, set apart a sum of money annually for being given
as grant -in-aid (hereinafter in this Act referred to as grant) to
local authority institutions and private institutions in the
State, recogn ised for this purpose in accordance with rules
made in this behalf.

43. (1) The Government may in such cases as they think
fit, by order, san ction gr ant to an y recognised l ocal author ity
educat ional in stitution or pr ivate educat ional institution
subject to such conditions as they may impose in the order
relating to such grant.

(2) Every grant sanctioned under sub -section (1) shall
be disbursed by the Director or such other officer
subordinate to the Director as the Government may, by a
general or special order, authorise in this behalf, in such
manner and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.

(3) The manager of every recognised institution which
is receiving any grant out of State funds shall be responsible
for the fulfilment of all the conditions subjec t to which such
grant has been given.

[44. [XXX]]

45. (1) Every application for the sanction of grant shall be
made to the Government, in such form as may be
prescribed and shall contain a declaration signed by the
manager of the recognised institution to the effect that the
conditions of recognition and of grant are being and shall

45. Omitted by Act No.5 of 1983. Government to set
apart sum for
giving grant -in-aid
to certain
recognised
institutions.
Authorities which
may sanction
grant.
Application for
sanction of grant
and the
conditions to be
fulfilled on such
sanction.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
continue to be fully ob served, that all facilities for inspection
of that institution, its accounts, registers and other records
relating to the grant shall be afforded to the inspecting staff
deputed f or the purpose and that all the returns and reports
prescribed in this behalf shall be submitted, to the
competent authority within the time specified by it.

(2) The Government may sanction such grant or for
good and sufficient reasons may refuse to sanction such
grant.

(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, any order
passed by the Government refusing to sanction the grant
shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court of law.

46. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the
Government may, after such enquiry as they may deem fit,
withhold, reduce or withdraw any grant payable to an
educational institution having regard to the funds at the
disposal of the Government or the conduct and efficiency
and the financial condition of such institutio n, after giving an
opportunity to the manager of the institution concerned of
making a representation against such withholding, reduction
or withdrawal.

(2) Without prejudice to the generali ty of the provisions
of sub -section (1) or any other pro vision of th is Act, the
Government may, after such enq uiry as they may deem fit,
withhold, reduce or withdraw any grant payable to any
educational institution if the manager of the institution
concerned, -

(i) fails to fulfi ll all or any of the conditions of gr ant;

(ii) denies admission to any citizen on grounds only
of religion, race, caste, language or any of them;
Power of
Government to
withhold reduce
or withdraw grant.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 51
(iii) allows any employee of the institution to take part
in any agitation intended to bring or attempt to bring into
hatred or contempt, or intended to excite or attempt to
excite disaffection towards, the Government established by
law in India;

(iv) directly or indirectly, encourages any propaganda
or practice of wounding the religious feelings of any class of
citizens of India or insultin g the religion or the religious
beliefs of that class;

(v) is guilty of falsification of registers, of misuse of
funds for purposes other than those for which they are
collected ;

(vi) fails to remedy within such reasonable time as
may be specified by the competent authority, the defects in
the maintenance of accounts pointed out by the auditors; or

(vii) fails to restore, within the time specified by the
competent authority, an employee w hose services have
been wrongfully dispensed with or fails to pay him any
arrears of salary or other benefits when directed to do so by
the competent authority.

(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every
order passed under this section shall be final and shall not
be questioned in any court of law.

47. (1) All the monies collected, grants received and other
movable property held by, or on behalf of a private
institution shall be utilised for the purpo ses for which they
are intended , and shall be accounted for by the manager in
such manner as may be prescribed.

(2) All the monies r eceived or held by or on behalf of
every private in stitut ion shall be deposited in a Bank. Utilisation of funds
and movable
property of private
institutions.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(3) The surpl us fund of every such institution shall be
invested in such manner as may be prescribed and be
utilised towards educational development only.

Explanation: - For the purpose of t his section “surplus
fund” means all the monies that remain unused with the
institution at the beginning of each academic year, aft er
providing for all the objects, needs, requirements or
improvements of t he institution during t he previous three
academic years.

CHAPTER IX
Accounts, Audit, Inspection and Returns.

48. Every educational institution receiving grants out of
State funds and other sources shall maintain account s in
such manner and containing such particulars as may be
prescribed.

49. (1) The accounts of every educational institution
receiving grants out of State funds shal l be audited at the
end of every academic year in such manner, after following
such proced ure and by such authority, officer or person as
may be prescribed and different authorities, officers or
persons may be prescribed for different classes of
educational institutions.

(2) (a) The prescribed authority, officer or person shall
have full access to the account books and other documents
required to be maintained by the educational institution in
respect of grants received by it out of State funds and shall
send a copy of the report on the audit of t he accounts under
sub-section (1 ) to the competent authority which shall
forward the report to the educational agency.
Accounts.
Annual audit of
accounts.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 53
(b) The educational agency shall, within such time as
may be prescribed, submit that report together with the
comments of that agency to the competent authority.

50. (1) The competent authority shall have the right to
cause an inspection of, or inquiry in respect of, any
educational institution, its accounts, its buildings,
laboratories, libraries, workshops and equipment and also
of the examinations, teaching and other, work conducted or
done by the institutio n to be made by such person or
persons as it may direct and to cause an inquiry to be made
in respect of any other matter connected with the institution
and the educational agency shall be entitled to be
represented thereat.

(2) The competent authority s hall communicate to the
educational agency the views of that authority with reference
to the result of such inspection or inquiry and may after
ascertaining the opinion of the educational agency thereon,
advise that agency upon the action to be taken.

(3) The educational agency shall report to the
competent authority the action, if any, which is proposed to
be taken or has been taken upon the results of such
inspection or inquiry. Such report shall be furnished within
such time as the competent authority may direct.

(4) where the educational agency does not, within a
reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of the
competent authority, that authority may, after considering
any explanation furnished or representation made by the
educational agency, issue such directions as that authority
deems fit; and the educational agency and the head of the
institution shall comply with such directions and shall be
responsible for the implementation of every such direction.

Inspection or
inquiry.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
51. Every educational agency shall , within such tim e or
within such extended time as may be fixed by the
competent authority in this behalf, furnish to the competent
authority such returns, statistics and other information as the
competent authority may, from time to time, require.

CHA PTER X
Prohibition of transfer of properties by aided educational
institutions.

52. In this Chapter -

(a) “manager ” means the owner, trustee or other
person who has power to tra nsfer any land or building
belonging to an educat ional institution and includes a local
authority;

(b) “transfer” includes sale, exchange, mortgage ,
charge, lease or gift.

53. (1) Where before or after the commencement of this
Act,-

(a) any land or buildin g has been acquired,
constructed, improv ed or altered for the purposes of any
educational instituti on, with the aid of any grant made from
the State funds; or

(b) any land or building has been transferred by the
Government for use for the purposes of any educational
institution, then, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
any other law for the time being in force or in any deed of
transfer or other document relating to the land or building, it
shall not be transferred without permission of the
Government under sub -section (2) ; nor shall the land or
building be used for any purpose other than the purposes of Definitions. Furnishing of
returns, etc.
Prohibition of
transfer of lands
and buildings by
educational
institutions
without the
permission from
Government in
certain cases.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 55
the educational instituti on or purposes ancillary thereto,
without the permission of the Government.

(2) The Government may, by order in writing, permit
the transfer of any such land or building subject to such
condi tions as they may impose, if,-

(i) the transfer is made in f urtherance of the purposes
of the educational institution or of ancillary purposes
approved by the Gov ernment, and the proceeds of such
transfer are to be wholly utilised in furtherance of th e said
purposes;

(ii) the transfer is made only in part in furtherance of
the purpo ses aforesaid, provided repayment is made to the
Government of such portion as the Government may direct
in the circumstances of the case, of the grant referred to in
clause (a) of sub -section (1 ) or of the current market value of
the lan d or building re ferred to in clause (b) of sub -section
(1) or of both, as the case may be;

(iii) the transfer is made for any oth er valid reason,
provid ed repayment is made to the Government in full of the
grant referred to in claus e (a) of su b-section (1 ) or of the
current market value of the land or building referred to in
clause (b) of sub -section (1) or of both, as the case may be.

(3) Any transfer of land or building made without
obtaining the permission of the Government under sub secti on (2) shall be null and void .

54. Where, in any case, the Government, after giving the
manager of the educational institution concerned an
opportunity to make his representation in regard to the
matte r, are satisfied that the provisions of sub -section (1 ) of
building, they may, by order, - Consequence of
breach of
provisions of
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(a) if the land or the land together with the building
standing thereon belonged to the Government and was
transferred by them for the purposes of the educational
institution, direct the Coll ector to take poss ession of the land
or land together with the building standing thereon, as the
case may be, or at their option, direct the manager to pay to
them in full , the current market value of the land or of the
land together with that of the building where it was also
transferred by them and also the amount of the grant, if any,
made by th e Government for improving the land or altering
or constructing the bu ilding;

(b) if the land or the building, if any, standing thereon
does not belong to the Government, dir ect the manager to
repay in full the grant made by the Government.

55. (1) Every order pa ssed by the Government under subsection (2) of section 53 or section 54 shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), be final.

(2) The manager of the institution in respect of which
such an ord er is passed, not b eing a local authority, may on
the ground that the amount re payable or payabl e by or to
him has been wrongly fixed in the order, apply within sixty
days from the date on which the order is received by him to
the District Judge having jurisdiction over the area in which
the property in quest ion is situated for fixing such amount
correctly in accordance with the provisions of sub -section
(2) of section 53 or section 54, as the case may be.

(3) The District Judge shall determine the amount
which is properly repayable or payable by or to the m anager
in accordance with the provisions of sub -section (2) of
determination shall be final.

Effect of orders
under section 53
(2) and 54.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 57
56. (1) When, in pursuance of an order under section 54,
the Collector takes possession of any land or building by
himself or through another, it shall vest abso lutely in the
Government free from all encumbrances.

(2) If the Collector or any person authorised by him in
this behal f is opposed or impeded in taking possession of
any land or building under this Chapter he shall, if he is a
Magistrate, enforce the surrender of such land or building to
himself; and, if he is not a Magistrate, he shall apply to a
Magistrate and such Magi strate shall enforce the surrender
of the land or building to the Collector.

(3) Whoever opposes or impedes the Collector or any
person authorised by him in taking possession of any land
or building under this Chapter shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to [one year ] or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.

57. Any sum required to be repaid or paid to the
Government in pursuance o f‟ section 53 or sect ion 54 or
provided in any other law for the time being in force, be
recovered from the properties of the institution or from the
manager thereof as if it were an arrear of land revenue due
from such educational institution or manager.

58. (1) No land or building referred to in sub -section (1) of
subject to a char ge by any Court whether in exe cution of a
decree or order or otherwise, unless the person seeking
such relief from the Court has obtained the permission of
the Government to do so and files such permission in the
Court.

46. Substituted by Act No.27 of 1987. Land or building
to vest in
Government
absolutely on
possession being
taken.
Recovery of sums
due under this
Chapter.
Court not to
attach, sell etc., in
the absence of
permission of the
Government.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(2) Whe n granting such permission, the Governmen t,
may impose such conditions as they deem fit.

(3) If any such land or building is attached or sold or a
charge is created thereon by any Court without the
permission of the Government having been obtained and
filed as aforesaid or if any condition imposed by them when
granting such permission is contravened, then the
attachment, sale or c harge, as the case may be, shall be
null and void.

CHAPTER XI.
Taking over of management, requisiti oning and acquisition
of educational institutions.

59. In this Chapter, -

(a) “educational institution ” means any school, college
or other institution for imparting education which is
managed by an individual, body or local authority and is
recognised by the Government, but does not include a
minority educational institution;

(b) “persons interested ” includes all persons claiming
or entitled to claim an interest in the amount payable on
account of the taking over of the management of the
educational institution or requisitioning or acquisition of the
property used for the purposes of an educational institution
or of any other institution connected therewith under this
Act.

60. (1) Where the Government are of opinion that th e
management of any educational institution should either in
the public interest or in order to secure the proper
management of the said educational institution be taken
over, they may after gi ving one month ‟s notice to the
management of such educational institution to make any Taking over of
management of
educational
institutions in
public interest. Definitions.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 59
representation direct by notification, that the management of
the said educational institution shall with effect on and from
the date specified therein vest in the Government until the
said e ducational institution i s acquired:

Provided that no private institution under the
management of a religious institution, endowment or a wakf
shall be taken over without the prior consent of such
management .

(2) The educational institution referred to in sub -section
(1) shall be deemed to include all assets, rights and
leaseholds, powers, authorities and privileges and all
property, movable and immovable, including lands,
buildings, stores, instruments and vehicles, cash balances,
reserve fund, investments and book debts and a ll other
rights and interests arising out of such property as were,
immediately before the date of taking over of the
management under sub-section (1) (hereinafter in this
Chapter referred to as the date aforesaid) in the ownership,
possession, power or control of t he ma nagement of such
educational institution and all books of account, registers
and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto.

(3) Any contract, whether express or implied, or other
arrangement (not being a contract or agreeme nt specified in
educatio nal institution, and in force immediately before the
taking over, shall be deemed to have terminated on the date
aforesa id.

(4) All persons, in whom the management of th e
educational institution vested immediately before the taking
over shall, as from the date aforesaid, cease to be so vested
and shall be deemed to have vacated their offices as such
on the date aforesaid.

[Act No.1 of 1982]
(5) Notwithstanding anything in any other law fo r the
time being in force, no person in respect of whom any
contract of management or other arrangement is terminated
by reason of the provisions contained in sub -section (3) or
who ceases to hold any office by reasons of the provisions
contained in sub-section (4) shall be entitled to claim any
compensation for the premature termination of the contract
of management or other arrangement or for the cessation of
management or for the loss of office, as the case may be.

(6) Notwithstanding any judg ment, decree or orde r of
any court, tribunal or other authority or anything contained
in any other law for the time being in force, every person in
whose possession or custody or under whose control the
educational institution or any part thereof, or any prop erties
attached thereto, may be immediately before the taking
over, shall on the date aforesaid, deliver possession of the
educational institution or part thereof or any properties
attached thereto, as the case may be, to the special officer
appointed by t he Government for the purpose of carrying on
the management of such educational institution for and on
behalf of the Government, or where no special officer is
appointed, to such other person as the Government may
direct.

(7) For the removal of any doubt , it is hereby declared
that any liability incurred by the private management in
relation to the educational institution before the taking over
shall be enforceable against the said management and not
against the Government or the special officer .

(8) The amount payable in respect of the vesting in the
Government of the management of an educational
institution under sub -section (1) shall be an amount equal to
the average net annual surplus income of such educational
institution during the period of its existence, or the period of
[Act No.1 of 1982] 61
five consecutive accounting years immediately preceding
the date of such vesting, whichever is less:

Provided that no such amount shall be payable if the
trust or management under which the educatio nal institution
is founded m akes provision for the running of such
institution .

Explanation: - In this sub -section, the expression
“accounting year ” means the period beginning on the 1st
day of July of any year and ending on the 30th day of June
of the year next follow ing.

(9) The amount payable under sub -section, (8) shall,
subject to rules made under this Act, be paid by the
competent authority to the person interested in the
educational institution in such manner and within such time
as may be prescribed.

61. If the Government or the special officer appoin ted
under section 60 is of opinion that any contract of
employment entered into by the management relation to the
educational institution at any time before taking over is
unduly onerous, they or he may, by giving to the employee
one month ‟s notice in writing or salary or wages for one
month in lieu thereof, terminate such contract of
employment.

62. (1) If the Gover nment are satisfied, after such enquiry
as they may think proper, that any contract or agreement
entered into at any time within a period of two years
immediately preceding the date aforesaid between the
management in relation to the educational institutio n and
any other person, in relation to any service, sale or supply
to, or by th e educational institution and in force immediately
before the taking over, has been entered into in bad faith, or
is found detrimental to the interests of the educational Power to
terminate
contracts of
employment.
Contracts etc.,
made in bad faith
may be cancelled
or varied.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
institution, they may make, within one hundred and eighty
days from the date aforesaid, an order cancelling or varying
(either un -conditionally or subject to such conditions as they
may think fit to impose) such contract or agreement and
thereafter the con tract or agreement shal l have effect
accordingly:

Provided that no contract or agreement shall be
cancelled or varied except after giving to the parties to the
contract or agreement one month ‟s notice to make a
representation in this regard.

(2) Any pe rson aggrieved by an order made under subsection (1) may, within thirty days from the date of
communication of the order, make an application to the
Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction the educational institution is
situated, for the variation or reversal of such order and
thereupon such Court may confirm, modify or reverse such
order.

63. Any transfer of property, movable or immovable or any
delivery of goods made by or on behalf of the educational
institution (not being a transfer or deli very made in the
ordinary course o f transact ion or in favour of a purchaser for
valuable consideration and in good faith), if made within a
period o f one y ear imme diately preceding the date
aforesa id, shall be void as against the Government or the
special officer, as the case may be.

64. (1) Where recognition or permission granted to an
educational institution is with drawn by the Gov ernment
under sub -section (3) of sect ion 21 or other wise, or where
an educational institution is closed before the last working
day of an academic year and if the Government consider it
necessary to requisition any property movable or
immovable, which before the withdrawal of the recognition Avoidance of
voluntary
transfers.
Requisitioning of
an educational
institution.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 63
or permission or the closing of the institution was being
used for the purposes of the institution or of a ny other
institution connected therewith, such as a hostel for
students, quarters for the re sidence of employees or a
playground, then notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
any other law for the time being in force, the Government
may, within three months from the withdrawal of the
recognition or permission or the closing of the educational
institution, as the case may be, requisition such property
and make such further orders as appear to them to be
necessary or expedient in connection with the requisition.

(2) Before requisitioning any property under sub section (1) the Government, -

(a) shall call upon the manager or any other person
who is in possession of the property by notice in writing to
show cause, within fifteen days of the .date of the service of
such notice to him why the property should not be
requisitioned and shall consid er the objections, if any,
shown by the manager or other person; and

(b) may, by order, direct that the manager or a
person shall not, wit hout permission of the competent
authority, dispose of, structurally alter, lease or in any
manner deal with, the property until the expiry of such
period, not exceeding three months, as may be specified in
the order.

(3) Where any property is requisitioned under sub section (1), the Government may, -

(a) use or deal with such property for any educational
purpose; or

(b) by order, permit any person or body or local
authority to use or deal with such property for any such
[Act No.1 of 1982]
purpose, subject to the payment of such rent and other
sums to the Government and the observance of such
conditions as may be specified in the order .

65. (1) Any person remain ing in possession of any
property in contravention of an order issued under section
may be summarily dispossessed of such property by an
officer empowered by the Government in this behalf, and in
the case of building, if free access to it is not afforded to
such officer, he may after giving reasonable warning and
facility of with drawing to any women not appearing in public
according to the customs of the country, r emove or open
any lock or bolt for break open any door or do any other act
necessary for effecting such dispossession.

(2) If any such officer is resisted in the exercise of such
power or discharge of such duty, the Magistrate having
jurisdiction shall, on a written requisition from such officer,
direct any police officer not below the rank of sub -inspector
to render such help as may be necessary to enable the
officer to exercise such power or discharge such duty.

66. (1) The Government may, at any time, release any
property requisitioned under this Chapter and in such case,
the possession of the property released from requisition
shall be del ivered to the manager or other person from
whom possession was taken at the time when the property
was requisitioned, or if there were no such manager or
person, the person deemed by the Government to be the
manager or owner of such property and such delivery of
possession shall be full disch arge of the Government from
all liabilities in respect of that property which any other
person may be entitled by the due process of law to enforce
against the person to whom possession of the property is so
delivered.
Summary power
for taking
possession of
property.
Release from
requisitioning and
discha rge of
liability of the
Government.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 65
(2) Where the person to whom possession of any such
property is to be delivered cannot be found or has no agent
or other person empowered to accept delivery on his behalf,
the Government shall cause to be published in the
47Telangana Gazette a notice declaring that the pro perty is
released from requisition; and in the case of any immovable
property, the Government shall also cause a copy thereof to
be affixed, on some conspicuous part of such property.

(3) When the notice referred to in sub -section (2) is
published i n the 47Telangana Gazette, the property specified
in such notice shall cease to be subject to requisition on
and from the date of such publication and shall be deemed
to have been delivered to the person entitled to possession
thereof; and the Government shall not be liabl e for any
amount, rent, or other claim in respect of such property for
any period after the said date.

67. (1) Where any property is v ested under sub -section ( 1)
of section 60 in connection with the management of an
educational institution or is subject to requisition under subsection ( 1) of section 64, the Government may, if they
consider it necessary to acquire the property for any public
purpose connected with education, acquire at any time such
property for the said public purpose by publishing in the
47Telangana G azette a notice to the effect that the
Governme nt have decided to acquire the property in
pursuance of this section:

Provided that before issuing such notice, the
Government shall call upon the manager of, or any other
person who in the opinion of the Government, is the person
interested in, such property to show cause why the property
should not be acquired; and after considering the objections

47. Substituted by G.O.Ms.No.15, Higher Education (TE ) Department,
dated 23.04.2015. Acquisition of
property.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
if any, shown by the manager or other person interested in
the proper ty the Government may pass such orders as they
deem fit.

(2) When notice as aforesaid is published in the
48Telangana Gazette, the requisitioned property shall on and
from the day on which the notice is so published, cease to
be subject to requisition and vest absolutely in the
Government free from all encumbrances.

68. (1) Where any property is requisitioned or acquired
under this Act, the amount payable therefor shal l be
determined and paid in the manner and in accordance with
the principles hereinafter set out, that is to say, -

(a) Where the amount is settled and fixed by
agreement, it shall be paid accordingly;

(b) Where there is no such agreement, the
Government shall appoint as arbitrator a person who is
holding or has held a judicial office, not below the rank of a
district judge, for determining the amount;

(c) at the commencement of the proceedings before
the arbitrator the Government and the person to whom the
amount is payable shall state what according to them is the
fair amount;

(d) the arbitrator shall after due enquiry determine the
amount which appears to him to be just and specify the
person or persons to whom such amount shall be pa id; and
in making the award determining the amount, he shall have
regard to the circumstances of each case and the provisions

48. Substituted by G.O.Ms.No.15, Higher Education (TE) Department,
dated 23.04.2015. Principles and
methods of
determining
amount for
property
requisitioned or
acquired.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 67
of sub -sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) so far as they are
applicable;

(e) where there is any dispute as to the person or
persons who are entitled to the amount, the arbitrator shall
decide such dispute and if the arbitrator finds that more
persons than one are entitled to the amount, he shall
apportion the amount amongst such persons according to
their rights, and

(f) nothing in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996, shall apply to arbitrations under this section.

(2) The amount payable for the requisitioning of any
property, movable or immovable, shall, in respect of the
period of requisition, be a sum equal to the rent which
would have been payable for the use and occupation of the
immovable property or for the use of the movable property,
if it had been taken on lease f or that period.

(3) The amount payable for the acquisition of any
immovab le property under section 67 shall be -

(a) the price which the requisitioned property would
have fetched in the open market if it had remained in the
same conditions as it was at the time of requisitioning and
been sold on the date of acquisition; or

(b) twice the price which the requisitioned property
would have fetched in the open market if it had been sold
on the date of requisition, whichever is less.

(4) The amount payable for the acquisition of any
movable property shall be the price which suc h property
would have fetched in the open market if it had been sold
on the date of acquisition.
Central Act 26 of 1996.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(5) Where any property requisitioned or acquired under
this Act was acquired with the grant from the State funds,
the amount of such grant shall be taken int o account in the
prescribed manner in determining the amount payable.

Explanation: - For purposes of this sub-section, at the
property acquired by the educat ional in stituti on shall be
deemed to have been acquired with the aid of such grant,
contribution, donation or collection unless the manager of
the educational institution proves to the satisfaction of the
arbitrator that the property ha s been acquired otherwise.

69. The amount payable under the award of arbitrator
shall, subject to any rules made un der this Act, be paid by
the competent authority to the person interested, in such
manner and within such time as may be specified in the
award.

70. Any person aggrieved by the award of the arb itrator
under section 68 may, within sixty days from th e date of
such award, prefer an appeal to the High Court:

Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal
after the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is
satisfied th at the appellant was prevented b y sufficient
cause from filing the appeal in time.

71. The arbitrator appointed under this Chapter, while
holdin g arbitration proceed ings under t his Act, shall have a ll
the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters,
namely: -

(a) s ummoning and enforcing the attendance of any
person and examining him on oath;
Payment of
amount for
property
requisitioned or
acquired.
Appeal fr om the
award of the
arbitrator under
respect of
amount.
Arbitrator to have
certain powers of
civil court.
Central Act 5 of 1908.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 69
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;

(c) reception of evidence or affidavits;

(d) requisitioning an y public record from any court or
office ;

(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses.

72. The competent authority may, for the purpose of
requisitioning or acquiring any property under this Chapter,
by order ,-

(a) empower any authority to enter and inspect any
property specified in the order liable to be requisitioned or
acquired under this Act;

(b) require any person to furnish to such authority such
information in his possession relating to the property as may
be specified in the order.

73. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any
contract or agreement or any law for the time being in force,
the following provisions shall apply in regard to the persons
on the staff of the educational institution immediately before
the date on which the management of the educational
institution is vested in the Government, namely: -

(a) the Government shall have power to terminate the
services of any such person after giving him three calendar
month‟s notice in writing or paying him th ree month‟s pay in
lieu of such notice;

(b) a person whose services have been retained sha ll
be governed at his option either by the conditions of service
as may from time to time be pre scribed or by the conditions Powers of entry
and inspection
and calling for
information.
Provisions for
existing staff of
educational
institutions.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
of service applicable to him immediately before such
vesting.

74. The posts in each category of employees of the
educ ational institutions in a district which have vested in the
Government under this Chapter shall be a separate unit for,
purposes o f seniority, d ischarge, revers ion f or want of
vacancies, re -appointment of probationers and approve d
probationers and appo intment o f full members.

CHAPTER XII
Transfer of control and management of certain schools.

75. (1) The Government may, by notification, and with the
prior consent of a local authority, take over the control and
management of any or all p rimary schools or secondary
schools established or maintained and adm inistered by the
said local authority from such date as may be specified in
the said notification; and from the date so notified it shall be
open to the Government to control an d manage the said
schools and the properties and assets of the local authority
pertaining to or intended to be used for, every such school
shall stand transferred to, and vest in the Government free
from an encumbrances.

(2) Notwithstanding any contract or agreement or any
law for the time being in force, every teacher or other person
employed in any of the said schools immediately before the
date on which the control and management thereof is taken
over by the Government shall, as from the said date, be
deemed to be an employee of the Government and shall
hold office on the same remuneration and upon the same
terms and conditions and with the same rights and
privileges as to pension, gratuity and othe r matte rs as he
would have held under the local authority until his
remuneration, terms and conditions of service are duly
altered by the Government: Posts of
employees of
educational
institutions vested
under this
Chapter to be
treated as a unit
for certain
purposes.
Powers of
Government to
take over control
and management
of schools,
belonging to local
authority.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 71
Provided that every such employee sh all, within a
period of three months or such other period beyond three
months as may be specified by the Government by a
notification, from the date of, taking over of the control and
management of the school, exercise his option either to be
retrenched f rom the service on receipt of such retrenchment
benefits as may be prescribed or to be absorbed in the
service of the Government with effect from the said date and
shall be governed by the terms and conditions governing
the said service which shall not be less favourable than
those applicable to such employee prior to the said date.

76. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the 49Telangana
Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 or the, rule s mad e thereunder, or
any other law for the ti me be ing in force relat ing to control
and management of schools, the Government may, with
effect on and from such date as may be notified, transfer,
with the prior consent of a 50zilla praja parishad, the control
and management of all primary schools or secondary
schools in a district, established or maintained and
administered, by the Government or any panchayat samithi
to the 50zilla praja parishad concerned; and from the date so
notified, it shall, be open to the 50zilla praja parishad to
control and manage the said schools in the district, and all
the properties and assets of the Government or the
panchayat samithi, as the case may be, pertaining to or
intended to be used for, every such school shall stand
transfe rred to, and vest in, the 50zilla praja parishad free from
all encumbrances.

(2) Notwithstanding any contract or agreement or any
law for the time being in force, every teacher or other person
employed in any of the said sc hools immediately before the
date on which the control and management thereof is

49. Adapted in G.O.Ms.No.9, PR & RD (Mandal) Department, dated
12.09.2014 and replaced by Act No.5 of 2018.
and management
of schools to zilla
parishads.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
transferred to the 51zilla praja parishad shall, as from the said
date, be deemed to be an employee of the 51zilla praja
parishad and shall hold office on the same remuneration
and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same
rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other
matters as he would have held under the Government, or
panchayat samithi, as the case may be, until his
remuneration and terms and conditions of service are duly
altered by the 51zilla praja parishad :

Provided that every such employee shall, within a
period of three months or such other period beyond three
months as may be specified by the 51zilla praja parishad,
from the date of transfer of the control and management of
the school, exercise his option either to be retrenched from
the service on receipt of such retrenchment benefits as may
be prescribed or to be absorbed in the service of the 51zilla
praja parishad with effect from the said da te and shall be
governed by the terms and conditions governing the sai d
service which shall not be less favourable than those
applicable to such employee prior to the said date.

77. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the 52Telangana
Panchayat Raj Act, 1994, the 53Telangana Municipalities Act,
or the rules made thereunder or any other law for the
time being in force relating to control and management of
schools, the Gove rnment may, with effect on , and from such
date as may be not ified, transfer, with the, prior consent of
the local autho rity concerned, the control and management
of any primary school, established or maintained and
administered by the Government or any panchayat samithi
or the municipality, to the, Abhyudaya Pradhamika Vidya

52. Adapted in G.O .Ms.No.9, PR & RD (Mandal) Department, dated
12.09.2014 and replaced by Act No.5 of 2018.
53. Adapted in G.O.Ms.No.142, MA & UD (F2) Department, dated
29.10.2015. Transfer of control
and management
of schools to
Abhyudaya
Pradhamika Vidya
Samstha.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 73
Samstha; and from the date so notified, it shall be open to
the Abhyudaya Pradhamika Vidya Samstha to con trol and
manage the said school ; and all the properties and assets of
the loc al authority pertaining to and intended to be used for
such school shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the
Abhyudaya Pradhamika Vidya Samstha free from all
encumbrances.

(2) Notwithstanding any contract or agreement or any
law for the time being in force, every teacher or other person
employed in the said school immediately before the date on
which the control and management thereof is transferred to
the Abhyudaya Pradhamika Vidya Samstha shall, as from
the said date, be deemed to be an employee of the said
Samstha and shall hold office on the same remuneration
and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same
rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other
matters as he would have held under the said local authority
until his remunerat ion and terms and conditions of service
are duly altered by the said Samstha:

Provided that every such employee shall, within a
period of three months or such period beyond three months
as may be specified by the said Samstha, from the date of
transfer of the control and management of the said school,
exercise his option either to be retrenched from the service
on receipt of such retrenchment benefits as may be
prescribed or to be absorbed in the service of the said
Samstha with effect from the said date and shall be
governed by the terms and conditions governing the said
service which shall not be less favourable than those
applicable to such employee prior, to the said date.

[Act No.1 of 1982]
CHAPTER XIII.
Constitution of educational service.

78. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act or the rules
made thereunder, the Government may, by notification,
constitute any officer or class of officers or any teacher or
class of tea chers appointed or deemed to be appointed
under this Act into an educational service for the State.

(2) Upon issue of a notification under sub -section (1),
the Government shall have power to make rules to regulate
the classificati on, methods of recruitment, conditions of
service, pay and allowances an d discipline and conduct of
the members of the educational service thereby cons tituted
and such rules may vest jurisdiction in relation to such
service i n the Government or in such authority or authorities,
as may be prescribed.

[78A. (1) Every teacher or member of the non -teaching
staff employed in any aided, private educational institution,
not belonging to last grade service, shall retire from service
on the afternoon of the last day of the month in w hich he
attains the age of fifty eight years :

Provided that a teacher or a member of the non teaching staff aforesaid, who has already attained the age of
fifty-eight years and continuing in service on the date of
commencement of the Andhra Pradesh Education
(Amendment) Act, 1993, shall retire on the afternoon of the
last day of the month of th e commencement of the said Act.

(2) Every member belonging to the last grade service
shall retire from service on the a fternoon of the last day of
the month in which he attains the age of sixty years.

1993. Constitution of
educational
service.
Age of
superannuation of
the staff in a ided
private
educational
Intitutions.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 75
Explanation :- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that an employee whose date o f birth is the first
day of a month shall retire from service on the afternoon of
the last day of the preceding month on attaining the age of
fifty eight or sixty years, as the case may be.

78B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any orders
issued by the Government for the payment of pension to the
employees of the aided, private Junior and Degree Colleges
before the commencement of Andhra Pradesh Education
(Amendment) Act, 1993, such employees including those in
the last grade service who attained the age of
superannuation as specified in section 78A shall be entitled
to pension with effect from 1st November, 1992 in
accordance with such separate rules as may be made in
that behalf.

(2) A teacher or a member in any aided private Junior
and Degree Colleges who continues in service beyond the
age of fifty eight years for any reason shall be entitled to
pension with effect from 1st November, 1992 in accordance
with such separate rule s as may be made in that behalf .]

[78C. The rule of special representation (Reservation) in
favour of Schedule Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward
classes shall be applicable for appointments to the posts in
private Educational Institutions :

Provided that the rule of special representation shall
not be applicable to the Minority Educational Institutions.

78D. Notwithstanding any judgement , decree or order of any
Court, no person shall claim approval of appointment made

of 2008. Pension to the
employees of
aided private
junior and Degree
Colleges.
Special
representation in
appoin tment to
the posts.
Abatement of
claims of
appointments in
Private
Educational
Institutions.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
in Private Educational Institutions except in accordance w ith

(a) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or
continued in any Court a gainst the Government or any
person or authority whatsoever for approving the
appointments otherwise made and all such pending
proceedings shall abate forthwith; and

(b) no Court shall enforce any decree or order directing
for approval of such appointmen ts.]

CHAPTER XIV.
Payment of salaries and allowances to and disciplinary
action against employees of private institutions.

79. (1) No teacher or member of the non -teaching staff
employed in any private institution (hereinafter in this
Chapter referred to as „the employee ‟) shall be dismissed,
removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which
he has been informed of the charges against hi m and given
a reasonable opportu nity of be ing heard in respect of those
charges :

[Provided that no order of dismissal, removal or
reduction in rank shall be passed under this sub -section
against an employee other than an employee of a min ority
educational institution witho ut the prior approval of such
authority or o fficer as may be prescribed for different classes
of private institutions:

Provided further that the management may prefer an
appeal against any order of the officer or author ity refusing
approval under this sub -section to such authority or officer
and within s uch period as may be prescribed .]

56. Added by Act No.27 of 1987. Dismissal,
removal or
reduction in rank
or suspension,
etc., of employees
of private
institutions.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 77
(2) An inquiry under sub -section ( 1) shall be completed
within a period of two months from the date of
communication of charges against the employee.

(3) (a) No employee shall be placed under suspension
except when an inquiry into the gross misconduct of such
employee is contemplated.

(b) No such suspension shall remain in force for more
than a period of two months from the date of suspension
and if such inquiry is not started and completed within that
period, such employee shall without prejudice to the inquiry,
be deemed to have been restored as employee:

Provided that the competent authority may, for reasons
to be recorded in wr iting, extend the said period of two
months for a further period not exceeding two months, if in
the opinion of such competent authority the inquiry could
not be completed within the said period of two months for
reasons directly attributable to such emplo yee.

(4) Every such employee as is placed under
suspension under sub -section (3) shall be paid sub sistence
allowance at such rates as may be prescribed during the
period of his suspension.

(5) Before imposing any penalty, other than the
penalties specified in sub -section ( 1), an employee shall be
informed in writing of the allegations on which action is
proposed to be taken and be given an opportunity of
making a representation, but it shall not be necessary to
hold an oral inquiry into such allegatio n.

80. (1) Any employee w ho is dismissed , removed or
reduced in rank may prefer an appeal against the order to
the competent authority within thirty days of the receipt of
the order by him . Appeal against
orders of
punishment
imposed on
employees of
private
institutions.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(2) The competent autho rity shall not in terfere with the
order appealed against unless the order is vitiated on
anyone or more of the following grounds namely: -

(a) that there is no mater ial to substantiate the charge
or charges framed against the employee; or

(b) that the authority who passed the order acted with
bias or malafides; or

(c) that the order is perverse or arbitrary; or

(d) that no reasonable opportunity has been afforded
to the employee to prove his innocence :

Provided that the competent authority shall not pass
any order prejudicial to the management unless an
opportunity of making a representation is given.

(3) The competent authority may, after giving notice to
the management of the private institution, pass such interim
orders as it deems fit, pending disposal of the appeal under
sub-section (2), if it is satisfied that the employee has made
out a prima facie case for interference.

(4) In respect of an orde r imposing any penalty as laid
down in sub -section (5) of section 79 an appeal shall lie to
the District Educational Officer having jurisdiction and in
respect of such appeals the order appealed against shall
not be set aside except on the grounds specified in sub section (2).

Explanation :- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that the provisions of this section shall apply to any
order imposing any penalty made on or after the date of the
commencement of this Act in any disciplinary proceeding
which was pending on that date.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 79
81. (1) Any employee or the management aggrieved by an
order of the competent authority under sub -section (2) of
thirty days from the date of receipt of the order.

(2) Where an appeal preferred under sub - section (1) of
authority within ninety days from the date the ap peal was
preferred, it shall be competent for the Governm ent either
suo motu or on application, to withdraw the appeal from the
competent authori ty and dispose of the same.

(3) The powers exercisable and the procedure to be
followed by the Government acting under this section shall
be the same as that of the c ompetent authority under

82. (1) If, before the date of the commencement of this Act,
any e mployee has been dismis sed or removed or reduced
in rank or h is appoin tment has been otherwise terminated
and any appeal preferred before that date –

(a) by him against such dismissal or removal or
reduction in rank or termination ; or

(b) by him or by the educationa l agency against any
order made before that date in the appeal referred to in
clause (a) ;

is pending on that date, such appeal shall stand transferred
to the competent authority under section 80.

(2) If any such appeal as is referred to in sub -section
(1) has been disposed of before the date of the
commencement of this Act, the order made in any such
appeal shall be deemed to be an order made under this Act,
and shall have effect accordingly. Appeal to
Government.
Special provision
regarding appeal
in certain past
disciplinary cases.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
83. Where retrenchment of any employee is ren endered
necessary by the management or competent aut hority
consequent on any change relating to education or course
of instruction or to any other matter, such retrenchment may
be effected with the prior approval of the competent
authority or the next higher authority, as the case may be .

84. (1) The pay and allowances of any employee in a
private inst itution sh all be paid on or before such day of
every month in such manner and by or through such
autho rity, officer or person as, may be prescribed .

(2) The Government shall have power to direct the
payment of salaries of all teachers and members of the nonteaching staff in any private aided institution or class of
private aided instit utions in such manner and through such
agency as the Government may, by order, specify.

[84-A. If the management or m anager contraven es, or
attempts to contravene, any of the provisions of this chapter
or any rule or order made thereunder, it or he shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year and with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees and in the case of continuing contravention, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, in
addition to withdraw al of recognition of the institution. ]

CHAPTER XV
Welfare and code of conduct and rules of conduct of the
employees of educational institutions.

85. (1) The Government may appoint a joint consultative
committee, consisting of the representatives of the
Government, managements and employees of educational

57. Inserted with marginal heading by Act No.27 of 1987. Retrenchment of
employees.
Pay and
allowances of
employees of
private institutions
to be paid in the
prescribed
manner.
Penalties for
contravention of
this Chapter.
Welfare of
employees and
their code of
conduct .
[Act No.1 of 1982] 81
institutions to deal with matters pertaining to welfare of
those employees.

(2) The Government may, [XXX] prescribe the code of
conduct and duties of those emplo yees.

86. The rules of conduct applicable to the employees of
educational institutions, other than the employees of a
private institution under management of a charitable or
religious institution, charitable or religious endowment or a
wakf, shall be such as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER XVI
Penalties and Procedure.

87. (1) If any person contravenes, or attempts to
contravene, or abets the contravention of, any of the
provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder, he shall
be punished w ith fine which may extend to [one thousand
rupees ] and in the case of continuing c ontraventio n, with an
additional fine which may extend to [two hundred rupees ]
for every day during which such contravention continues
after conviction for the first such contravention.

(2) If any person obstructs any authority, officer or
person fr om e ntering any private educational institution in
the exercise of any power conferred on it or him by or under
this Act, he shall be punished with fine which may exten d to
[two thousand rupees].

88. (1) Where an offence against any of the provisions of
this Act or any rule made thereunder has been committed
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence
was committed, was incharge of and was responsible to, the

58. Omitted by Act No.27 of 1987.
59. Substituted by Act No.27 of 1987. Conduct rules.
Penalties for
contravention.
Offence by
companies.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
company for the conduct of business of the company, as
well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment, if he
proves that the offence was commi tted without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due deligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub -section (1) where
any such offence has been committed by a company and it
is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect
on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or
other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that of fence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.

Explanation: - For the purpose of this section,

(a) “company ” means any body corporate and
includes a firm, a society or other association of individuals,
and

(b) “director” in rel ation t o –

(i) a firm, means a partner in the firm;

(ii) a society or other association of individuals means
the person who is entrusted, under the rules of the society
or other association, with management of the affairs of the
society or other association, as the case may be.

[Act No.1 of 1982] 83
CHAPTER XVII.
Miscellaneous.

89. save as otherwise provided in this Act, -

(a) any person aggrieved by an order passed by an
officer or authority other than the Director under this Act
may, within thirty days from the date of communication of
such order, appeal to the Director;

(b) any person aggrieved by an order passed by the
Director under this Act other than an order passe d by him
under clause (a) may, within sixty days from the date of the
communication of such order, appeal to the Government.

Explanation: - For purposes of this section and secti on
92, the expression “Director” includes the Additional
Director or Joint D irector when he exercises the powers of
the Director under this Act.

90. (1) The Government or the Director may, either suo
motu or on an application from any person interested, call
for and examine the record of an educational institution or of
any authority, officer or person in respect of any
administrative or quasi -judicial decision or order, not being a
proceeding in respect of which a reference to an arbitrator
or an appeal to the High Court is provided, to satisfy
themselves as to the regularity, correctness, legality or
prop riety of any decision or order passed therein; and if, in
any case it appears to the Government that any such
decision or order should be modified, ann ulled or reversed
or remitted for reconsideration, they may pass orders
accord ingly:

Provided that the Government shall not pass any order
adversely affecting any party unless such party has had an
opportunity of making a representation. Appeals.
Power of revision
by the
Government.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(2) The Government may stay the e xecution of any
such decision or order pending the exerc ise of powers
under sub -section (1) in respect thereof.

(3) Every application preferred under sub -section (1)
shall be made within such time and in such manner and
accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.

91. (1) The Gov ernment or the Director may , suo motu at
any time or on an application received from any person
interested within ninety days of the passing of any order
under the provisions of this Act, review any such order, if it
was passed by them or him under any mistake, whether of
fact or of law, or i n ignorance of any material fact.

(2) The provisions contained in the proviso to sub section (1) and in sub -sections (2)and (3) of section 90
shall, so far as may be, apply in respect of any proceeding
under this section as they apply to a proceeding und er subsection (1) of that section.

92. (1) The Government may, subject to other provi sions of
this Act, by order, direct the Director or any other officer not
below the rank of a District Educational Officer, to make an
enquiry or to take appropriate proceeding under this Act in
respect of any matter specified in the said order; and the
Director or the other officer, as the case may be, shall report
to the Government in due course the result of the enquiry
made or the proceeding taken by him.

(2) The Government may give directions to any
educational institution or tutorial institution as to the giving
effect to any of the provisions contained in this Act or of any
rules or orders made thereunder and the manage r or owner,
as the case may be, of such institution shall comply with
every such direction.
Review.
Powers of
Government to
give directions.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 85
93. The Government may, by notification, delegate all or
any of their powers under this Act, except those conferred
upon the m by this section and sections 90, 91, 99 and 102
to any person or authority subordinate to them subject to
such conditions and to such control and revision by such
authority as may be spe cified in the notification; and they
may in the like manner withdraw any powers so delegated.

94. (1) Where, at any time, it appears to the Director that
the manager of a private institution or a local authority
institution has made default in performing any functions
entrusted to him by or under this Act relating to the
maintenance and administration of the institution, he may,
by order in writing, fix a period for the performance of such
function.

(2) If the manager of a local authority institution or of a
private institution other than a minority educational
institution fails to perform the fun ction within the period so
fixed, the Director may appoint any officer subordinate to
him to perform such function on behalf of the manager for
the purpose of securing the proper maintenance and
administration of the institution or for the purpose of
avoiding hardship to the employees of the institution and
may direct that the expenses of performing such function
shall be paid within such time as he may fix, to the
Government by the manager out of the funds of the
institution and without prejudice to any other method of
recovery, the whole or any part of such expenses may be
deducted from any sum payable to the institution by way of
grant -in-aid.

95. Every officer not below the rank of a deputy inspector
in respect of an educational institution imparting primary
education and in respect of other institutions, any other
officer not below such rank as may be prescribed, shall,
subject to such conditions as may be pre scribed, be Delegation of
powers of
Government.
Emergency
powers of
Director.
Power to enter
and inspect.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
competent to enter at any tim e during the normal working
hours of an educational or tutorial institution, any premises
of any such institution, within his jurisdiction and to inspect
any record, register or other documents or any movable or
immovable property relating to such institution for the
purpose of exercising his powers and performing his
functions under this Act.

96. Any person who obstructs an officer of the Government
in the exercise of any power conferred on him, or in the
performance of any funct ion entrusted t o him , by or under
this Act or an other person lawful ly assisting such officer i n
the exerc ise of such power or i n the performance of such
function or who fails to comply with any lawful direction
made by such officer or person shall be punished with fine
which may extend to [one thousand rupees .]

97. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall be
instituted against the Government or any officer or authority
or person empowered to exercise the powers or perform the
functions by or under this Act for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or under
the rule s or orders made thereunder.

98. Every manager of any educational institution and every
employee of such institution s hall be deemed to be a public
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code when on duty in connection with any examination
conducted by the competent authority under this Act.

99. (1) (a) The Government m ay by notification [XXX]
make rules to carry out a ll or any of the purposes of th is Act.

60. Substituted by Act No.27 of 1987.
61. Omitted by Act No.5 of 1983. Penalty for
obstructing officer
or other person
exercising powers
under this Act.
Protection of acts
done in good
faith.
Managers,
employees, etc.,
to be public
servants.
Central Act 45 of 1860.
Powers of
Government to
make rules.
[Act No.1 of 1982] 87
(b) In particular and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for,-

(i) [XXX]

(ii) the steps to be taken for providing necessary
facilities for imparting compulsory primary education before
notifying any area to be specified area;

(iii) the manner in which lists of children shall be
prepa red by the attendance authority in any specified area;

(iv) the distance beyond which a child cannot be
compelled to attend an approved school;

(v) the mann er in which any enquiry under this Act
shall be held;

(vi) the form in which an attendance order under
this Act shall be passed;

(vii) the registers, statements, reports, returns,
budgets and other information to be maintained or furnished
by approved schools for the purposes of this Act;

(viii) the declaration as to what constitutes
secondary or higher seco ndary education, professional
education, technical edu cation, special education, school
places, school -age and attendance, in schools or other
institutions;

(ix) the registers, statements, reports, returns,
accounts and budgets and other infor mation to be

62. Omitted by Act No.27 of 1987.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
maintained or furnished by the local authorities in respect of
education funds;

(x) the procedure for the assessment and
realisation of the taxes leviable under this Act;

(xi) the establishment or maintenance and
administration of educatio nal institutions;

(xii) the gran t of recognition to educational
institutions and the conditions therefor;

(xiii) regulating the rates of fees; the levy and
collection of fees in educational institutions;

(xiv) the manner in which accounts, registers,
records and other documents shall be maintained in the
educational institutions and the authority responsible for
such maintenance;

(xv) the submission of returns, statements, reports
and accounts by managers or owners of properties of
educational or tutorial institutions;

(xvi) the inspection of educational and tutorial
institutions and the officers by whom inspection shall be
made;

(xvii) the mode of keeping and the auditing of
accounts of such institutions;

(xviii) the standards of education and courses of
study i n educational institutions;

(xix) the grant of sums by the Government to
educational institutions towards providing scholarships,
bursaries, fee concessions and the like;
[Act No.1 of 1982] 89
(xx) the preparation a nd submission of
development plans for educational insti tutions in general
and for technical education and the contents of such plans;

(xxi) the powers and the functions of the officers
and other subordinate staff of the Education Department;

(xxii) the preparation and sanction of building plans
and est imates of the educational institutions and the
requirements to be fulfilled by the buildings for the
educational institutions maintained by the local authorities
and private institutions;

(xxiii) the purposes for which the premises of the
educational institutions may be used and the restrictions
and conditions subject to which such premises may be
used for any other purpose;

(xxiv) the regulation of the use of text books, maps,
plans, instruments and other laboratory and sports
equipment in the ins titutions;

(xxv) the regulation for admission into educational
institutions of pupils for the academic course, private study
and other special courses and the attendance thereat;

(xxvi) the qualifications necessary and other
conditions to be fulfilled for appearing at the examinations
conducted by the authorities under this Act and the method
of valuation or revaluation of answer scripts;

(xxvii) the opening of special night schools and the
conditions for their working and of parallel sect ions or
classes in the institutions for linguistic minorities;

[Act No.1 of 1982]
(xxviii) the manner of conducting the class and
terminal examinations and promotion of pupils to higher
classes;

(xxix) the conditions subject to which donations or
contributions from t he public may be accepted by the
educational institutions and the naming of ins titutions ;

(xxx) the conditions for co -education in the
educational institutions and the regulation of the conduct
and discipline of pupils and the penalty for misconduct or
indiscipline ;

(xxxi) the manner of service of notices, orders and
other proceedings, of presenting appeals or applications for
revision or review and the procedure for dealing with them
and the fee in respect thereof;

(xxxii) the scale of fees or charges or the manner of
fixing fees or charges payable in respect of any certificate,
permission, marks, lists or other document for which such
fees may be collected ;

(xxxiii) the constitution of educational councils at the
panchayat samithi and 63zilla praja parishad and the State
level; their composition and functions;

(xxxiv) all matters expressly required or allowed by
this Act to be prescribed or in respect of which this Act
makes no provision or makes in sufficient provision and a
provision is, in the opinion of the Government, necessary for
the proper implementation of this Act.

(2) Any rule may be made under this Act with
retrospective effect and when such a rule is made the

[Act No.1 of 1982] 91
reasons for making the rule shall be specified in a statement
to be laid before both Houses of the State Legislature.

(3) Every notification issued and every rule made under
this Act, shall immediately after it is issued or made, be laid
before each House of the State Legislature if it is in session
and if it is not in session in the session immediately
following for a total period of fourteen days which may be
comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and
if, before the expiration of the session in which it is so laid or
the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the notification or in the rule or in
the annulment of the notification or the rule, the notification
or the rule shall, from the date on which the modification or
annulment is notified, have effec t only in su ch modified form
or shall stand annulled, as the case may be; so however
that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that notification or rule.

100. The Government may, by notification and for reasons
to be specified therein, exempt any educational institution
from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder, subject to such conditions as
they may deem fit to impose and may like wise vary or
cancel such exemption.

101. (1) The following Acts ‟ are hereby repealed:

(a) The Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Elementary
Education Act, 1920 ;

(b) The Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Aided
institutions (Prohibition of T ransfer of Property) Act, 1948 in
so far as it relates to the institutions which are intended for
an educational purpose;
Exemption.
Repeals.
Act VIII of 1920.
Act XIV of 1948.
[Act No.1 of 1982]
(c) The Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions
(Requ isitioni ng and Acquisition) Act, 1956;

(d) The Andhra Pradesh Primary Education Act, 1961;

(e) The Andhra Pradesh Recognised Private
Educational Institutions (Control) Act, 1975.

(2) Upon such repeal, the provisions of sections 8 and
of the 64Telangana General Clauses Act, 1891, shall
apply.

102. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provi sions
of this Act, the Gove rnment may by order make su ch
provisions not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as
appear to them to be necessary or expedient for removing
the difficulty.

* * *

64. Adapted in G.O.Ms.No.45, Law (F ) Department, dated 01.06.2016. Act XXXVI of 1956.
Act XI of 1961.
Act 11 of 1975.
Act I of 1891.
Power to remove
difficulties.