AN
ACT
to establish a State Medical Council for regulating registration of practitioners in
medicine and matters conne cted therewith in Tripura
Be it enacted in the Tripura Legislative Assembly in the Sixty First year of the
Republic of India.
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extend and commencement
(1) This Act may be called The Tripura State Medical Council Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole State of Tripura
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by
Notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definition
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires;
(a) “College” means Medica l College established by law and affiliated to any
University and recognized by Medical Council of India.
(b) “Government ” means the Government of Tripura.
The Tripura State Medical Council Act, 2010 2
© Capital Law Infotech, 2014 (c) “Medicine ” means and includes the Modern Scientific system of Medicine
and includes Surgery, Obs tetrics and allied disciplines;
(d) “Member ” means a member of The Tripura State Medical Council;
(e) “Notification ” means Notification issued by the State Government under
this Act;
(f) “Prescribed ” means prescribed by rules;
(g) “President ” means Preside nt of The Tripura State Medical Council;
(h) “Recognized Medical Practitioner ” means a practitioner duly qualified in
Modern Scientific medicine included in the Schedules appended to the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956);
(i) “Recognized Medic al Qualification ” means any of the Medical qualifications
included in the Schedules of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of
1956);
(j) “Register ” means the Tripura Medical Register maintained by The Tripura
State Medical Council for registration of registered medical practitioners;
(k) “Registrar ” means the Registrar of The Tripura State Medical Council
appointed under this Act;
(l) “Regulation ” means the regulations made under this Act;
(m) “Rules” means rules made under this Act;
(n) “State” mean s the State of Tripura;
(o) “State Council ” means The Tripura State Medical Council constituted
under this Act;
(p) “University ” means any recognized University of India.
3. First State Council
(1) The Government shall by Notification in the official Gazet te constitute the First
State Council with the following members namely -
(a) Director of Health Services, Govt. of Tripura, or Director of Medical
Education, Govt. of Tripura shall be the President and such other person
as nominated by the Govt. shall be the Vice -President of the Council.
(b) The Principal of Agartala Govt. Medical College and the Principal of
Tripura Medical College & Dr. B.R.A.'M. Teaching Hospital will be
nominated as members of the First State Council.
(c) The Secretary, I.M.A., Tripur a State Branch and Secretary of
recognized service Doctors Associations will be nominated as Members of
the First State Council.
The Tripura State Medical Council Act, 2010 3
© Capital Law Infotech, 2014 (d) The State Government shall nominate Secretary and 2 (two) Joint
Secretaries of the State Council from amongst the qualified medical
practitioner of the State.
(a) The term of the First State Council shall be for three years from the
date of Notification.
(b) The President of the Council shall inform the State Government 6(six)
months before the date of expiry of the term of First State Council so
that the process for constitution of the State Council can be taken by the
Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
4. Constitution of regular State Council
(1) Before the expiry of three years of constitution of fir st nominated State
Council, the State government shall, by notification in the official Gazette,
constitute for the purposes of this Act, a State Council with the following: -
(a) Such number of m embers not exceeding seven who possess
recognized medical qua lification and are enrolled in the State Medical
Register, to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled in
Register.
(b) Two persons possessing recognized medical qualification and enrolled
in State Medical Register shall be nominated by the S tate Government.
(c) Secretary, IMA, Tripura State' Branch will be the ex -officio member of
the State Council.
(d) Principals of recognized Medical Colleges of the State, Director,
Health Services, Govt. of Tripura and Director, Medical Education, Govt.
of Tripura will be ex -officio Members of the State Council.
5. President, Vice -President and Members of the Council
The President and Vice -President of the State Council shall be elected or selected
by the members of the State Council from amongst themselves .
(2) The term of the President, Vice -President and members of the State Council
shall be five years from the date of Gazette notification or until successors shall
have been duly elected or nominated whichever is longer.
6. Restrictions on nomination o f Membership
(1) No person shall be eligible for nomination as an ex -officio member u/s 4,
unless he possess any of the medical qualifications included in the first and
second schedules of the Indian Medical Council act, 1956 % and resides in the
State.
(2) N o person may at the same time serve as a member in more than one
capacity.
(3) The members of the Council shall be eligible for reelection or for re nomination, but a member who holds, or who has held, office as President or
The Tripura State Medical Council Act, 2010 4
© Capital Law Infotech, 2014 Vice-President of State Council , shall be eligible for re -nomination or reelection as
the case may be, to that office, but only once.
7. Incorporation of the State Council
The State Medical Council so constituted shall be a body corporate having
perpetual succession and a common seal, w ith power to acquire and hold
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said
name sue and be sued.
8. Meeting of the Council, Quorum etc
(1) Unless otherwise prescribed 50% of the total number of the members of State
Council sh all form a quorum, and all the Acts of the State Council shall be decided
by a majority of members present and voting if required.
(2) A casual vacancy, prior to the expiry of the term, in the State Council due to
the death, resignation of any member shall be filled up by way. of election or
nomination by the State Government for remaining term accordingly as specified
under this Act.
(3) A nominated or elected member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if
he is absent without excuse continuously for s ix months.
(4) The State Council shall meet at least once in three months of every year at its
office at such time as may be appointed by the Council
(5) No Act, proceeding of the State Medical Council or any committee thereof
shall be called in question o n the ground merely on the existence of any vacancy,
or any defect in the constitution of the state council.
(6) The office of the State Council shall be situated at Agartala.
9. Executive Committee, and other Committees
(1) The Council shall constitute fr om amongst its members an Executive
Committee and such other committees as may be considered essential by the
Council for execution of business of the Council.
(2) The Executive Committee shall be formed with not less than five members
and not more than se ven members. The President, Vice -President and Registrar,
shall be the Ex -Officio members of the Executive Committee.
(3) The President and Vice -President of the Council shall act as President and
Vice-President respectively in the Executive Committee.
10. Registrar and Secretary
The Council with prior approval of the Government shall appoint or nominate a
Registrar from registered medical practitioners, enrolled in the State Register,
who will also function as Secretary of the Council.
11. Officers & Emplo yees of the Council
The Tripura State Medical Council Act, 2010 5
© Capital Law Infotech, 2014 The Council with prior approval of the State Government shall appoint or
nominate such employees or such other persons as the Council may deem
necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
12. Remuneration, salaries & allowances
(1) The Council with prior approval of the State Government shall fix the
remuneration and allowances to be paid to its president, Vice -President and
Members.
(2) The salary and other allowances and terms and conditions of service of the
Registrar and other e mployees of the State Council shall be such as may be
decided by the Council with prior approval of State Government.
13. Funds of the State Council
The State Council shall receive one time financial assistance of maximum Rs.25
lakhs from the State Governm ent, All revenue received by the state Council shall
be deposited to its Bank Account. The State Council shall maintain its all sorts of
expenditure towards functioning of the Council with that financial assistance and
revenue receipt from time to time. Th e accounts of the State Council shall be
audited annually through the State Government authorities.
14. State Medical Register
(1) The State Council shall maintain in such form as may be prescribed by the
State Council, a register of medical practitioners to be known as State Medical
Register, which shall contain the names, address and recognized medical
qualification of all persons together with the dates on which such qualifications
were acquired.
(2) Every person who holds any of the medical qualificatio ns included in the
Schedules to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, may apply to the Registrar
giving a correct description of his qualifications, with the dates on which they
were granted, and present his degree, diploma or licence along with such fee a s
may be prescribed for being registered under this Act.
(3) Any person who were in medical practice or profession in the State of Tripura,
but were registered immediately before the date of commencement of this Act in
other State Council shall require to register with The Tripura State Medical Council
within six months.
(4) All medical practitioners are to be duly registered with The Tripura State
Medical Council for practicing in the State of Tripura.
15. Duties of Registrar
(1) The Registrar shall, if sa tisfied that an applicant is entitled to be registered,
enter his name in the register provisionally.
(2) The Registrar shall send six printed copies of the State Medical Register to the
Indian Medical Council after the first day of April of each year and also inform the
Medical Council of India, without any delay, all additions, and all other
amendments, in the State Register made from time to time.
The Tripura State Medical Council Act, 2010 6
© Capital Law Infotech, 2014 (3) It shall be duty of the Registrar of the State Council to revise from time to
time the Tripura Medical R egister and publish it in Tripura Gazette and in such
other manner as the Council may deem fit and proper.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act and subject to orders of State Council, it
shall be the duty of the Registrar to keep and maintain the Stat e Register.
16. Functioning of State Council
(1) The State Council shall consider all applications as may be received by the
Registrar from persons holding recognized medical qualifications for registration
with State Council in the manner as may be prescr ibed.
(2) The Registrar of State Council, shall award provisional registration to the
students of either the Government or Private Medical Colleges in the State, for
undertaking their compulsory internship training after passing final examination in
the ma nner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Registrar of the State Council on being satisfied that the person
concerned possesses a recognized medical qualification and all Other criterions
shall enter the name of a medical practitioner in the State Medical Registe r.
17. Rights of Practitioner
(1) No person, other than a practitioner of Modern Scientific system of medicine
who possesses a recognized medical qualification and is enrolled on the State
Register -
(A) shall hold office as Physician or Surgeon or any oth er office (by whatever
designation called) in government or in any institution maintained by local or
other authority for treating the patients in Modem Scientific System of Medicine
or for administrative purposes.
(b) shall be entitled to sign or authenti cate medical illness or fitness certificate or
any other certificate required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly
qualified medical practitioner.
18. Power to refuse registration
(1) The Council may refuse to permit the registration of the n ame of any person
in the roll of the Tripura Medical Register who has been imprisoned by any court
for an offence which amount to moral turpitude; or
(2) Who, after the enquiry, has been found guilty of serious professional
misconduct.
19. Removal of names from the Tripura Medical Register
The Council may direct the removal of the name of any person from the Tripura
Medical Register --
(i) Whose name, is provided to the satisfaction of the State Council, has
been fraudulently or incorrectly entered in the Tr ipura Medical Register,
or
The Tripura State Medical Council Act, 2010 7
© Capital Law Infotech, 2014 (ii) who has been sentenced by any court for any offence which amounts
to moral turpitude; or
(iii) who after due enquiry made by the Council has been found guilty of
serious professional misconduct.
20. Furnishing of information to the State Govt. by the State Council
(1) The State Council shall furnish all such reports, copies of its minutes,
abstracts of its accounts and other informations to the State Government as the
Government may require.
(2) The State Government may publi sh in such manner as it may deem fit, any
report, copy, abstract or other information furnished to it under this section.
21. Professional conduct and punishment
(1) The State Council may prescribe standard of professional conduct and
etiquette and code of ethics for medical practitioners consistence with tlj,e
provisions made by the Indian Medical Council.
(2) Any practitioner who commits professional misconduct shall be punished by
the State Council in the manner as may be prescribed.
22. Protection of ac tion taken in good faith
No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government,
the Council, or any Committee thereof, or any officer or servant of the
Government or Council for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act.
23. Appeal
(1) An appeal shall lie to the State Government for every decision of the State
Council under clause 12 and 13 of this Act.
(2) Every appeal shall be preferred within three months f rom the date of such
decision.
24. Com mission of inquiry
(1) Whenever it appears to the State Government that the State Council is not
complying with any of the provisions of this Act, the State Government may
appoint a Commission of enquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom may
be appo inted by the State Government and out of the said two, one being a
sitting or retired Judge of a High Court, and the third one by the State Council,
and shall inquire in a summary manner and submit to the State Government the
findings of such inquiry.
(2) The State Government on the basis of report of such commission shall direct
the State Council to take suitable actions or remedial steps as may seem
necessary.
The Tripura State Medical Council Act, 2010 8
© Capital Law Infotech, 2014 (3) A Commission of inquiry shall have power to administer oaths, to enforce the
attendance of w itness and the production of document, and shall have all such
other necessary powers for the purpose of any inquiry conducted by it as are
exercised by a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
25. Registration of additional qualification
If any person whose name is entered in the State Medical Register obtains any
title, diploma or other qualification for proficiency in sanitary science, public
health or medicine which is a recognized medical qualification, he shall, on
application made in th is behalf in the prescribed manner be entitled to have any
entry stating such other title, diploma or other qualification made against his
name in the State Medical Register either in substitution for or in addition to any
entry previously made.
26. Privil eges of persons who are enrolled on the State Medical Register
Subject to the conditions and restrictions laid down in this Act, regarding medical
practice by persons possessing certain recognized medical qualifications, every
person whose name is for the time being borne on the State Medical Register
shall be entitled according to his qualifications to practice as a medical
practitioner in any part of State and to recover in due course of law in respect of
such practice and expenses,, charges in respect of medicaments or other
appliances, or any fees to which he may be entitled.
27. Persons enrolled on the State Medical Register to notify change of place of
residence or practice
Every person registered in the State Medical Register shall notify any transfer of
the place of his residence or practice to the State Medical Council, within thirty
days of such transfer failing which his right to participate in the election of
members of the State Medical Council shall be liable to be forfeited by order of
the Stat e Government either permanently or for such period as may be specified
thereon.
28. Power to make rules
(1) The State Government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
In particular and without pre judice to the generality of the foregoing powers such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely : -
(i) election of the president and V ice -President of the State Council;
(ii) management of the property of the State Council and the
maintenance and audit of its accounts;
(iii) powers and duties of the President and Vice -President; (iv)
resignation of members of State Council;
(v) the tenure of office and powers and duties of the Registrar and other
officers of the State Council;
The Tripura State Medical Council Act, 2010 9
© Capital Law Infotech, 2014 (vi) The particulars to be started and the proof of the qualifications and
the format of applications for registration under this Act;
(vii) the fees to be paid on applications for registration and provisional
registration; and
(viii) any other matter for which under this Act provision may be made
by Rules.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is
“made, before the State Assembly while it is in session.
29. Power to make regulations
The Tripura State Medical Council may , with previous approval of the State
Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistence with the
provisions of this Act and the Rules made there under for all matters for which
provision is necessary to expedient for the purposes of giving ef fect to the
provisions of this Act.
Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers such regulations may
provide for all or any of the following matters : -
(i) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Council, the times and
places where suc h meetings are to be held, the conduct of business
thereat and other matters ancillary or incidental thereto;
(ii) the conduct of business of the State Council;
(iii) any matter for which under this Act provisions may be made by
regulations.
30. Establishm ent of Government and private Medical College
(1) A society or a Trust lawfully registered under the relevant laws of the State
may establish Medical College duly recognized by the Indian Medical Council after
obtaining previous permission from the State G overnment.
(2) The colleges so established shall be affiliated to such Universities as may be
recognized by the University Grants Commission and the State Government.
(3) The State Government may, in the similar manner mentioned in sub -sections
(1) and (2) establish Medical Colleges.
31. Power to remove difficulties
(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State
Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,
remove such difficulty.
Provide d that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
The Tripura State Medical Council Act, 2010 10
© Capital Law Infotech, 2014 (2) However, order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be,
after it is made, before the State Assembly.
Samiran Das
Secretar y, Law.
Government of Tripura.