An
Act
To provide for the constitution of an Authority for the unified control of forests in the
State
WHEREAS, there is need to further adopt measures to prevent indiscriminate felling
of trees in the State:
AND, WHEREAS, for that purpose it is expedient to have an authority with persons
from the State Government and the District C ouncil as members:
AND, WHEREAS, concurrence of all the Chief Executive Members of the District
Councils in the State has been obtained:
Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya in the Forty -second Y ear of
the Republic of India as follows:-
1. Short title, extend and commencement -
(1) This Act may be called the Meghalaya Forest Authority Act, 1991.
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Meghalaya.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd March, 1991.
2. Definitions - In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context-
(a) “Authority” means the Meghalaya Forest Authority constituted under section 3;
(b) “District Council” means an Autonomous District Council constituted under the
provisions of the Sixth Scheduled to the Cons titution of India; and
(c) “Forest” means all classes of forests but excludes reserved forests, Government or Government protected forests and any area recorded as forests in Government
records.
3. Constitution of the Authority -
(1) There shall be constituted the Meghalaya Forest Authority with a Board of
Governors comprising of the Chief Minister, the Minister- in-charge, Forests and
Environment and the Chief Executive Members of the Autonomous District Councils in the State.
(2) The Chief Minister shall be the Chairm an, the Minister -in-charge, Forests and
Environment, the Deputy Chairman and an officer of the State Forests
Department, not below the rank of a Conservator of the Forests to be nominated
by the State Government, the Member Secretary of the Board of Governor.
(3) In the event that there is no council of Ministers in the State of Executive Committee in any District Council the Governors as the case may be, of the Board
shall, for the time being, be appointed by the Governor of Meghalaya.
4. Functions of the Authori ty- The functions of the Authority shall be to advise the
State Government and the District Councils on proper co -ordination and
implementation of State and District Council forest lows and in the preparation of forest plans and schemes and other matters connected with the preservation of forests in the State.
5. Meetings of the Authority and Quorum -
(1) The Authority shall meet as often as may be necessary and all matters in a
meeting shall be decided by the majority members present with the Chairman
casting his vote only in case of a tie.
(2) The quorum for any meeting shall be four including the person presiding.
(3) Every meeting shall be presided over the Chairman and, in his absence, by the
Deputy Chairman.
6. Officers and Staff-
(1) The Member -Secretary shall be the Chief administrative officer of the Authority
and shall exercise supervision and control over its day to day affairs, authenticated
letters other papers emanating from it and maintain or cause to be maintained
accounts and other records.
(2) The Authority may with prior approval of Government appoint such other officers and staff as may be necessary not carrying out its function under this Act.
7. Power to make rules - The State Government may make rules for carrying out the
purpose of this Act.
8. Act not to be in der ogation of any other laws - The provisions of this Act shall not
be in derogation of any other law on forests operating in the State.
9. Repeal and Saving -
(1) The Meghalaya Forest Authority Ordinance, 1991 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal any action taken or anything done under the Ordinance so repeal shall repealed shall be deemed to have been taken or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act.