An Act to provide for the establishment of University of Ladakh at Leh in the State and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
In exercise of the powers vested under Proclamation No. P -1/18 of 2018 dated 20th of
June, 2018, the Governor is pleased to enact as follows : -

1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the University of
Ladakh Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force from the date of its publication in the Government Gazette .
2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the Cluster University ;
(b) "Affiliated College" means an institution imparting instruction for the Bachelor `s
Degree, Integrated Honours and Postgraduate courses recognized by the Cluster
University in accordance with the provisions of this Act and t he Statutes ;
(c) "Autonomous College" means an institution imparting instruction for the Bachelor
`s Degree, Integrated Honours and Postgraduate courses with an autonomous
status recognized by the Cluster University in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and the Statutes ;
(d) "College" means an institution maintained or admitted to its privileges by the
Cluster University and includes a Constituent/ Autonomous/Affiliated College ;
(e) "Cluster University" means the University of Ladakh, created by pooling the
resources of existing Colleges of Ladakh and all references to the term "Cluster
University" in this Act wherever occurring, shall mean and construed
as "University of Ladakh" ;
(f) "Constituent College" means the colleges constituti ng the Cluster University and
recognized as such by the Syndicate of the Cluster University in accordance with
the provisions of this Act and the Statutes ;
(g) "Faculties", "Boards of Studies", "Board of Inspection" and "Boards of Research
Studies" mean t he "Faculties", "Boards of Studies", "Board of
Inspection" and "Boards of Research Studies" of the Cluster University ;
(h) "Government" means the Government of Jammu and Kashmir ;
(i) "Head of the Department" means the Head of the Cluster University Teach ing
Department who has the status of a Professor or an Associate Professor in the
Cluster University and where any Cluster University has no teaching faculty in a
subject the person duly appointed, for the time being, by the university ;
(j) "Principal" means the Head of a College or a person duly appointed, for the time
being ;
(k) "Regulations" means the Regulations of the Cluster University made under this
Act ;
(l) "Statutes" mean the Statutes of the Cluster University made under this Act ;
(m) "Syndica te" means the Syndicate of the Cluster University ;
(n) "Teachers" include, Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and
any other persons imparting instructions in the Cluster University or in any
College maintained or admitted to its privil eges by the Cluster University ;
(o) "Teachers of the Cluster University" means persons appointed or recognized by
the Cluster University for the purpose of imparting instruction in the Cluster
University or in any Constituent College ; and
(p) "University Council" means the University Council of the Cluster University.
3. Incorporation. - The University of Ladakh, shall be a body corporate known by the
name of "the University of Ladakh", having perpetual succession and a common seal
with power to acquire a nd hold property, movable and immovable, to transfer the same,
to contract and to do all other things necessary for the purpose of its constitution and
may sue or be sued by its corporate name as aforesaid.
4. Objects of the University. - The objects of th e University shall be, -
(a) to become the Cluster of vibrant institutions working to disseminate and advance
knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of
learning as it may deem fit ;
(b) to act as a change agent by havi ng special focus on the skill development and
creation of skilled workforce by undertaking industry oriented teaching, training
and research, extension programmes and providing employable skills with a view
to contribute to the development of the society ;
(c) to make special provisions for integrated courses in humanities, social science,
science and technology in its education programme ;
(d) to take appropriate measure for promoting innovations in teaching -learning
process and inter disciplinary studies and research ;
(e) to establish linkages with industry for promotion of science, technology,
entrepreneurial skills, innovation, etc. to and adopt innovative methods to achieve
the status of a self -reliant institution ; and
(f) to pay special attention to the improvement of the social and economic conditions
and welfare of people and their intellectual, academic and cultural development.
5. Powers and Functions of Cluster University. - The Cluster University shall have
the following powers and functions, na mely : -
(a) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the Cluster University
may deem fit and to make provision for research and for the advancement and
dissemination of knowledge ;
(b) to hold examinations, to grant degrees to and to conf er other academic
distinctions on persons who -
(i) have pursued an approved course of study in a college of the Cluster
University or in any educational institution approved for the purpose, or
distant learners under conditions laid down in the Statutes and Regulations ;
(ii) have carried an independent research under conditions laid down in the
Statutes ;
(iii) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions on approved persons in the
manner laid down in the Statutes ;
(iv) to grant such diplom as to and to provide such lectures and instructions for
persons not being on the rolls of the Cluster University as the Cluster
University may determine ;
(v) to co -operate with other Universities and authorities in such a manner and
for such as the Cluste r University may determine ;
(vi) to institute Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant
Professorships and any other teaching posts required by the Cluster
University ;
(vii) to establish and maintain colleges, to recognize colleges and other
institutions not maintained by the Cluster University and to withdraw such
recognition ;
(viii) to inspect constituent, autonomous and affiliated colleges and other
institutions and places approved by the Cluster University for the residence
of students ;
(ix) to demand and receive payments of such fees and other charges as may
be authorized by the Statutes and Regulations so as to achieve the status of
a completely self sustaining corporate body ;
(x) to obtain loans in furtherance of the objects of the Clus ter University ;
(xi) to supervise and control the residence and discipline of students of the
Cluster University or of colleges and other institutions admitted or affiliated to
it and to make arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare ;
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, exhibitions, prizes and medals in
accordance with the Statutes and Regulations ;
(xiii) to endeavor for creation of resources and put the available resources
including human and infrastructural assets to optimal uti lization so as to
become a self -reliant sustaining organization ; and
(xiv) to do such other acts and things, whether incidental to the powers
aforesaid or not, as may be required in order to further the objects of the
Cluster University as a teaching, aff iliating or examining body, and to
cultivate and promote arts, science and other branches of learning.
6. Approval of the Government. - Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing
section, any re -organization or alteration in structure, pattern or medium of education at
the Cluster University level shall require the previous approval of the Government.
7. Cluster University open to all Classes and Creeds. - The Cluster University shall
be open to all persons irrespective of sex, caste, cl ass or creed and it shall not be lawful
for the Cluster University to adopt or impose on any person any test whatsoever of
religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to a certificate, diploma or degree of
the Cluster University, or to serve as a teacher or to hold any office in the Cluster
University, or to enjoy or exercise any privileges thereof, except where such test is
specially prescribed by the Statutes, or, in respect of any particular benefaction
accepted by the Cluster University, wher e such test is made a condition thereof by any
testamentary or other instrument creating such benefaction.
8. Affiliation Restricted to Educational Institutions in the State. - Notwithstanding
anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no e ducational institution
outside the territory of the State shall be affiliated with, or be admitted to any privileges
of the Cluster University under this Act.
9. Officers of the Cluster University. - The following shall be the officers of Cluster
Universit y :-
(i) the Chancellor ;
(ii) the Pro -Chancellor ;
(iii) the Vice -Chancellor ;
(iv) the Financial Advisor ;
(v) the Educational Advisor ;
(vi) the Registrar ;
(vii) the Controller of Examinations ; and
(viii) such officers as the Statutes may declare to be the officers of the Cluster
University.
10. The Chancellor. - (1) The Governor of the State shall be the Chancellor of the
Cluster University. He shall be the Head of Cluster University and shall, when present,
preside at the meetings of the Cluster University Council and at the Convocation of
Cluster University.
(2) The Chancellor shall have such powers as may be conferred on him by this Act or
the Statutes.
(3) Every proposal for the conferment of any honorary degree shall be subject to the
confirmation of the Chancellor.
(4) The Chancellor may delegate to the Pro -Chancellor such of his powers under this
Act or the Statutes, as he may specify.
11. The Pro -Chancellor. - (1) The Chief Minister shall be the ex -officio Pro -Chancellor
of the Clust er University.
(2) The Pro -Chancellor shall, when present, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at
the meetings of the University Council and at the Convocations of Cluster University.
(3) The Pro -Chancellor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made, by such
person or persons as he may direct, of the Cluster University, its buildings, laboratories,
equipment, and of any institutions associated with the Cluster University and also of the
examinations, teaching and other work conducted or do ne by the Cluster University and
to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with
the Cluster University. The Pro -Chancellor shall in every case give notice to the Cluster
University of his intention to cause an inspect ion or inquiry to be made and the Cluster
University shall be entitled to be represented thereat.
(4) The Pro -Chancellor may address the Vice -Chancellor of the University with
reference to the result of such inspection and inquiry and the Vice -Chancellor s hall
place the same before the Syndicate and also the Cluster University Council of the
University, if necessary, with such advice as the Pro -Chancellor may offer upon the
action to be taken thereon.
(5) The Vice -Chancellor of the Cluster University shall then, within such time as the Pro Chancellor may fix, submit to him a report of the action taken or proposed to be taken
by the Syndicate together with the view which the University Council may have
expressed on the report.
(6) If the Syndicate does not, w ithin a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of
the Pro -Chancellor, the Pro -Chancellor may, after considering any explanation which
the Syndicate may furnish, issue such directions in consultation with the Vice Chancellor as he may think fit.
12. The Vice -Chancellor. - (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall either be a whole -time paid or
a part -time honorary officer of the Cluster University as the Chancellor may determine
and shall be appointed by the Chancellor in consultation with the Pro -Chancellor f rom
amongst the persons whose names are submitted to him by a Committee constituted in
accordance with the provisions of sub -section (2).
(2) The Committee referred to in sub -section (1) shall consist of three persons, namely
:-
(a) two persons not connect ed with the Cluster University or any college of the
Cluster University to be nominated by the University Council ;
(b) a third person not connected with the Cluster University or any college of the
Cluster University to be nominated by the Chancellor, who shall also be the
Chairman of the Committee.
(3) The Committee constituted under sub -section (2) shall submit a panel of three
names to the Chancellor for appointment of the Vice -Chancellor.
(4) If the Chancellor does not consider any of the persons on th e panel recommended
by the Committee suitable for appointment as Vice -Chancellor, he may direct the
Committee to prepare a fresh panel of three names for submission to him or may direct
to constitute a fresh Committee for this purpose.
(5) The Vice -Chancel lor of the Cluster University shall hold office for five years :
Provided that on the expiry of the term of his office, the Vice -Chancellor shall be eligible
for re -appointment for such term as the Chancellor may in consultation with the Pro Chancellor det ermine :
Provided further that the Vice -Chancellor shall not be removed from his office except by
order of the Chancellor passed in consultation with the Pro -Chancellor, on the ground of
misbehavior or incapacity or if it appears to the Chancellor that the continuance of the
Vice-Chancellor in office is detrimental to the interests of the Cluster University, after
due enquiry by such person who is or has been a judge of a High Court to be nominated
by the Chancellor, in consultation with the Pro -Chancellor, in which the Vice -Chancellor
shall have an opportunity of making his representation against such removal.
(6) The Vice -Chancellor of the Cluster University shall, in case he is a whole -time paid
officer, receive salary not exceeding the limit prescribed by the University Council and
other facilities as the Chancellor may determine, in addition to free residential
accommodation ; provided that in exceptional cases the Chancellor may allow a higher
salary in consultation with the Government. In c ase the Vice -Chancellor is appointed on
part time honorary basis, he shall receive such honorarium and other facilities as the
Chancellor may determine in consultation with the Government.
(7) Where any temporary vacancy of a Vice -Chancellor occurs by reas on of resignation,
illness, leave or other cause, the University Council shall report the same to the
Chancellor who shall make such arrangement for carrying on the duties of the Vice Chancellor as he may think fit.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained i n sub -section (5), the Vice -Chancellor shall
continue in office beyond the expiry of his term until his successor is appointed and
enters upon his office.
13. Powers and Duties of the Vice -Chancellor. - (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the
Principal Execut ive and, academic officer of the Cluster University and shall, in the
absence of the Chancellor and the Pro -Chancellor, preside over the meetings of the
University Council and at any convocation of the Cluster University. He shall be an ex officio member a nd Chairman of the Syndicate/Academic Council and such other
authorities and bodies as are provided under the provisions of the Act, and shall be
entitled to be present and to speak at any meeting of any authority or body of the
Cluster University but shal l not be entitled to vote there at unless he is a member of the
authority or the body concerned.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that the provisions of this Act, the
Statutes and the Regulations are faithfully observed and he shall have all powers
necessary for the purpose.
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall have power to convene meetings of the University
Council, the Syndicate, the Academic Council and joint meetings of Faculties and
Boards of Studies of the Cluster University.
(4) The Vice -Chancellor may take action as he deems necessary in any emergency
which, in his opinion, calls for immediate action. He shall in such a case and as soon as
or may be thereafter, report his action to the officer, authority or other body of the
Cluster University who or which would ordinarily have dealt with the matter.
(5) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Vice -Chancellor of the Cluster University
shall have the powers to make appointments of the ministerial, technical and inferior
staff.
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall give effect to the orders of the University Council and the
Syndicate of the Cluster University regarding the appointment, dismissal and
suspension of persons in the employment of the Cluster University and shall exercise
general control over the affairs of the Cluster University. He shall be responsible for the
discipline of the Cluster University in accordance with this Act, Statutes and
Regulations.
(7) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers as may be prescri bed by
Statutes and Regulations.
(8) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate any of his powers under this Act or the Statutes
and Regulations made thereunder to any other officer or body of the Cluster University.
14. Financial Advisor. - (1) The Administrative S ecretary to Government, Finance
Department, or any other officer nominated by the Government shall be the ex -officio
Financial Advisor of the Cluster University.
(2) The Financial Advisor shall exercise general supervision over the funds of each
Cluster Un iversity and shall advise it as regards its financial policy.
(3) The Financial Advisor shall be an ex -officio member of the University Council and
the Syndicate of the Cluster University.
(4) The Financial Advisor shall, -
(a) present annual estimates and the statement of accounts to the Syndicate and the
University Council ; and
(b) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed
by the Statutes and Regulations.
15. Registrar. - (1) The Registrar of the Cluster University shal l be a whole -time officer
and shall be appointed by the University Council on the recommendation of the
Selection Committee, constituted under Section 34 of the Act. The terms and conditions
of service and the emoluments of the Registrar shall be such as p rescribed by the
University Council.
(2) The Registrar of the Cluster University shall act as the Secretary of the University
Council and the Boards of Research Studies and other bodies of the Cluster University.
(3) The Registrar of the Cluster University shall, subject to the sanction of the Vice Chancellor and subject to the Regulations that may be framed in this behalf, control the
ministerial, technical and inferior staff of the Cluster University.
(4) The Registrar of the Cluster University shall be t he custodian of the records, the
common seal and such other property of the Cluster University as the University Council
of Syndicate may commit to his charge.
(5) The Registrar of the Cluster University shall have power to realize and receive all
moneys d ue to the Cluster University and sign and grant receipts for the same, to make
all disbursements on account of the Cluster University and, subject to provisions of
Statutes, sign such cheques or other instruments as may be necessary for the purpose.
(6) Th e Registrar of the Cluster University shall issue under his signatures notice
convening meetings of the University Council, the Syndicate and the Boards of
Research Studies of the Cluster University.
(7) The Registrar shall, in the execution of his duties, be subject to the immediate
direction and control of the Vice -Chancellor and shall render such assistance to the
Vice-Chancellor as may be required by him in the performance of his official duties.
(8) The Registrar of the Cluster University shall exercise such other powers and perform
such other duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes and the Regulations or as may
be assigned to him by any authority of the Cluster University.
(9) The Registrar may, with the previous approval of the Vice - Chance llor, delegate any
of his powers prescribed under the provisions of this Act or the Statutes or the
Regulations made thereunder to any other officer of the Cluster University.
16. Controller of Examinations. - (1) The Controller of Examinations of the Clus ter
University shall be a whole -time officer of the Cluster University and shall be appointed
by the University Council on the recommendation of the Selection Committee
constituted in accordance with the provisions of Section 34 of this Act on such terms
and conditions as the University Council may from time to time prescribe.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Controller of Examinations of the Cluster University to
make arrangements connected with the setting and printing of question papers for all
the examin ations held by the Cluster University including their safe custody and all other
matters connected therewith.
(3) Subject to directions of the Syndicate, the Controller of Examinations of the Cluster
University shall make all arrangements for the conduct o f examinations of the Cluster
University.
(4) Subject to directions of the Syndicate, the Controller of Examinations of the Cluster
University shall arrange all items of the examination work such as dispatch and transit
of answer books and question papers, evaluation of answer scripts, tabulation of
results, complaints against question papers set for the examinations, use of unfair
means, publication and rechecking/re -evaluation of results and other related matters.
(5) The Controller of Examinations of the Cluster University shall exercise such other
powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed under the Statutes and
Regulations from time to time.
(6) The Controller of Examinations of the Cluster University shall, in the execution of his
duties , be subject to the immediate direction and control of the Vice -Chancellor of the
Cluster University and shall render such assistance to the Vice -Chancellor as may be
required by him in the performance of his official duties.
17. Other Officers. - Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the procedure
for appointment and the powers of the officers of the Cluster University other than the
Chancellor, the Pro -Chancellor, the Vice -Chancellor, the Financial Advisor, the
Educational Advisor, the Registr ar and the Controller of Examinations shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
18. Authorities. - The following shall be the authorities of the Cluster University : -
(i) the University Council ;
(ii) the Syndicate ;
(iii) the Academic Council ;
(iv) the Faculties ;
(v) the Boards of Studies ;
(vi) the Boards of Research Studies ;
(vii) the Board of Inspection ; and
(viii) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities
of the Cluster University.
19. University Council. - (1) There shall be a University Council in the Cluster
University consisting of the following members, namely : -
(i) the Chancellor ;
(ii) the Pro -Chancellor ;
(iii) the Minister, Incharge Higher Education Department ;
(iv) the Chief Executive Councilor of L adakh Autonomous Hill Development Council,
Leh ;
(v) the Chief Executive Councilor of Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council,
Kargil ;
(vi) the Vice -Chancellor of the Cluster University ;
(vii) the Vice -Chancellors of the other Cluster Universities established in the State ;
(viii) the Financial Advisor ;
(ix) the Educational Advisor ;
(x) Principals of all the constituent colleges of the Cluster University ;
(xi) two Deans of the Faculties of the Cluster University to be nominated by th e
Chancellor by rotation ;
(xii) two Principals of the autonomous/affiliated colleges to be nominated by the
Chancellor in consultation with Pro -Chancellor ; and
(xiii) two nominees of the Chancellor.
(2) The period for which members nominated under (viii) to (x) of sub -section (1) shall
hold office, would be as prescribed in the Statutes in this behalf.
(3) The meetings of the University Council of the Cluster University shall be presided
over by the Chancellor, when present. In his absence, the Pro -Chance llor shall preside
and in the absence of both the Chancellor and the Pro -Chancellor, the Vice -Chancellor
of the Cluster University shall preside.
20. Powers and Functions of the University Council. - (1) The University Council of
the Cluster University sha ll be the supreme authority of the Cluster University and shall
have the following powers, namely : -
(a) to make Statutes under this Act and to amend and repeal the same in
consultation with the Syndicate ;
(b) to make Regulations in consultation with the Syndicate ;
(c) to approve the financial estimates framed by the Syndicate of the Cluster
University ;
(d) to approve plans of development and expansion of the Cluster University ;
(e) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual reports ;
(f) save as ot herwise provided in this Act, to appoint officers of the status of Joint
Registrar, Deputy Librarian and above and teachers of the status of Associate
Professors and above and to define their duties :
Provided that no officer or teacher shall be appointed by the University Council until
provision has been made for his salary in the approved budget of the Cluster University
:
Provided further that all appointments (permanent or temporary) to the posts of officers
or teachers referred to in this section shall be made by the Cluster University Council on
the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose in
accordance with the provisions of Section 34 of this Act, and on such terms and
conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes :
Provided also that the Vice -Chancellor may make appointments of teachers referred to
in this section as a temporary measure for a period not exceeding six months to carry
on the work and if the recommendations of the Selection Committee are not received
within a period of six months, the Vice -Chancellor may extend the appointment, if any,
made by him, for the duration of the academic session with the approval of the
University Council ;
(g) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be
conferred or imposed upon it by this Act or the Statutes ;
(h) to constitute committees for specific purposes and to assign such duties to them
as it deems fit ;
(i) to delegate such of its powers to any officer or authority of the Cluster University
as it may deem fit, provided that such delegation is made by a majority of not less
than two -thirds of the members of the University Council ; and
(j) to exercise such other powers of the Cluster University as are not otherwise
provided for in this Act and the Statutes and Regulations made thereunder.
21. Syndicate. - (1) The Syndicate shall be the Chief Executive Authority except in
respect of the matters falling within the purview of the University Council in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and it shall consist of the following members, namely : -
(i) the Vice -Chancellor ;
(ii) the Financial Advisor ;
(iii) the Educational Advisor ;
(iv) Principals of all the constituent colleges of the Cluster University ;
(v) two Deans of the Faculties of the Clust er University by rotation to be nominated
by the Vice -Chancellor ;
(vi) two Deans of Faculties of the other Cluster Universities established in the State
by rotation to be nominated by the Chancellor ;
(vii) one member of the Academic Council of the Cluste r University nominated by the
Council from amongst its members ;
(viii) two members of the Syndicate of the other Cluster Universities established in
the State to be nominated by that body ; and
(ix) three nominees of the Chancellor.
(2) The terms and cond itions of the office of members of a Syndicate other than ex officio members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes in this behalf.
22. Powers and Functions of the Syndicate. - (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,
the Statutes and the Reg ulations, the Syndicate of the Cluster University shall exercise
and perform the following powers and functions : -
(a) to frame the budget estimates of the Cluster University and to submit these to the
University Council at a time to be prescribed by Statu tes ;
(b) to recommend the draft statutes and regulations or amendments or revocation
thereof and other proposals for consideration by the University Council;
(c) to hold control, and administer the funds, property and other assets of the Cluster
Universit y :
Provided that no expenditure shall be incurred which has not been included in the
approved estimates except with the sanction of the University Council :
Provided further that the Syndicate shall have powers of reappropriation in accordance
with the Re gulations to be prescribed in this behalf ;
(d) save as otherwise provided in this Act to appoint officers (below the status of
Joint Registrar and Deputy Librarian) and teachers (below the status of a
Associate Professor) and to define their duties :
Provided that no officer or teacher shall be appointed by a Syndicate until provision has
been made for his salary in the approved budget of the Cluster University :
Provided further that all appointments (permanent or temporary) to the posts of Officers
or teachers referred to in this section shall be made by the Syndicate on the
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose in accordance
with the provisions of Section 34 of this Act and on such terms and conditions as may
be prescribe d by the Statutes :
Provided also that the Vice -Chancellor may make appointments of teachers referred to
in this section as a temporary measure for a period not exceeding six months to carry
on the work and if the recommendations of the Selection Committee are not received
within a period of six months, the Vice -Chancellor of the Cluster University may extend
the appointments, if any, made by him, for the duration of the academic session with the
approval of the Syndicate ;
(e) to admit new colleges to the privileges of affiliated or constituent colleges of the
Cluster University subject to the conditions to be laid down in the Statutes ;
(f) to arrange for and direct the periodical and special inspection of the colleges and
other institutions ;
(g) to award scholarships, prizes, fellowships, exhibitions, bursaries and other such
awards in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this behalf ;
(h) to control and manage the Libraries of the Cluster University ;
(i) to provide buildings, premises, furniture, apparatus, equipment and other means
and facilities needed for carrying on the work of the Cluster University ;
(j) to invest any moneys belonging to the Cluster University including any unapplied
income in any of the approved securities, or to place in fixed deposit in any bank,
approved by the Government in this behalf, any portion of such moneys not
required immediately for expenditure ;
(k) to demand and receive such fees as may from time to time be prescribed by
Statutes and Regulations ;
(l) to constitute committees for specific purposes and to assign such duties to them
as may be deemed necessary ;
(m) to recommend to the University Council the plans for development and
expansion of the Cluster University ;
(n) to appoint paper setters and examiners for all the examinations held by the
Cluster University in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Statutes ;
(o) to give directions for holding of examinations compilation and publication of
results ;
(p) to give directions for the editi ng, printing and publishing of such text -books for
various examinations of the Cluster University as may be considered necessary
for this purpose ;
(q) to maintain proper standards of teaching and examination in consultation with the
Academic Council of th e Cluster University ;
(r) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the Cluster
University ;
(s) to direct the form, custody and use of the common seal of the Cluster University ;
(t) to accept or transfer any movable or immovable p roperty on behalf of the Cluster
University ;
(u) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be
conferred upon or assigned to it by this Act or the Statutes ; and
(v) to delegate, whenever necessary, appropriate financial and admini strative
powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Registrar, the Principals of Constituent
Colleges, the Heads of the Postgraduate Departments, the Controller of
Examinations or any other officer of the Cluster University.
(2) Any difference or disagreement aris ing between the Syndicate and the Vice Chancellor with regard to any decision taken by the Syndicate may be referred by the
Vice-Chancellor to the Chancellor. The Chancellor shall refer back such decision to the
Syndicate for reconsideration. In case the S yndicate endorses its earlier decision by a
two-thirds majority, such decision shall be deemed to be final.
23. Academic Council. - The Academic Council of the Cluster University shall consist
of the following persons, all of whom shall be ex -officio membe rs :-
(i) The Vice -Chancellor of the Cluster University ;
(ii) Principals of the Constituent Colleges or Autonomous Colleges or Affiliated
Colleges of the Cluster University nominated by the Vice -Chancellor ;
(iii) The Deans of Faculties of the Cluster Uni versity ;
(iv) The Heads of Departments of the Cluster University ha ving the status of
Professors or Associate Professors ;
(v) Four Professors/Associate Professors from constituent/ autonomous/affiliated
colleges of the Cluster University representing su bjects other than those
represented by the Principals, nominated by the Vice -Chancellor ;
(vi) Deans of the faculties of the other Cluster Universities established in the State ;
and
(vii) Two Professors of the other Cluster Universities established in the State.
24. Powers and Functions of the Academic Council. - (1) The Academic Council of
the Cluster University shall have the following powers and functions : -
(a) to control and regulate the standards of teaching and examinations in the Cluster
University ;
(b) to prescribe the syllabi and the courses of study for all the examinations held by
the Cluster University ;
(c) to make proposals to the Syndicate and the University Council for the institution
of Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships, or other
teaching posts and re -appropriating positions in various subjects (on sufficient
justifications) in regard to their duties ;
(d) to formulate, modify or revise, subject to control of the Syndicate and the
University Counc il, schemes for the constitution of Faculties and for the
assignment of subjects to the Faculties ;
(e) to nominate teachers or specialists to the Faculties ;
(f) to promote research within the Cluster University and to acquire reports of such
research fro m persons engaged therein ;
(g) to advise the Syndicate and the University Council on academic matters ; and
(h) to make proposals to the higher authorities of the Cluster University for
supplementing the teaching provided in the constituent, autonomous an d affiliated
colleges.
(2) The Academic Council of the Cluster University shall have the powers to appoint a
Standing Committee of the members of the Academic Council of which not less than
two thirds shall be Cluster University Professors, Associate Profe ssors, Principals, or
teachers of constituent, autonomous and affiliated colleges not lower in rank than that of
a Professor or Associate Professor and to delegate to it such of its powers as it may
deem fit. The Standing Committee shall have power to invi te experts, whenever
necessary, for advice on a particular matter under consideration.
25. Faculties. - (1) The Cluster University shall have the Faculties one each for Arts,
Science, Social Sciences, Commerce, Education and such other faculties as may be
prescribed by the Statutes of the Cluster University from time to time.
(2) Each of the faculties of Arts, Science, Social Sciences, Commerce and Education
shall consist of, -
(i) The Professors and Associate Professors of the Cluster University Schools
comprising the Faculty ;
(ii) Professors or Associate Professors, in case there are no Professors in the
concerned subject, representing the constituent, autonomous and affiliated
colleges of the Cluster University in each subject comprising each F aculty ;
(iii) two persons other than teachers nominated to the Faculty by the Academic
Council possessing expert knowledge of the subject, comprising the Faculty.
26. Powers of each Faculty. - Each Faculty of the Cluster University shall have the
followin g powers and functions, namely : -
(a) subject to the control of the Academic Council to organize the teaching work of
the Cluster University in the subjects assigned to the Faculty ;
(b) to suggest to the Academic Council the syllabi and courses of studies for
different examinations after consulting the Boards of Studies ;
(c) to recommend to the Academic Council the conditions for the award of degrees,
diplomas and other distinctions ;
(d) to deal with any matter referred to it by the University Councillor the Syndicate or
the Academic Council ;
(e) to discharge such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes and
Regulations ; and
(f) to transact such other business as may be approved by the Deans of the
Faculties.
27. The Deans. - (1) There shall be a Dean of each Faculty who shall be nominated by
the Vice -Chancellor by rotation according to seniority in the manner and subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes :
Provided that the office of the Dean of a Faculty shall be held by a member of the
Faculty who is the Cluster University Professor in a subject comprised in the Faculty
and in case if there is no Cluster University Professor in any subject comprised in a
Faculty, it may be held by a member of the Faculty who is the Sen ior Principal or Senior
most Professor/Associate Professor in a College in the same faculty :
Provided further that no person shall hold the office of the Dean for more than two
consecutive terms except where there is no other person eligible to hold the office.
(2) The Dean of Faculty shall be responsible for the due observance of the Statutes and
Regulations relating to his Faculty.
(3) Each Faculty shall comprise such subjects of study as may be prescribed by the
Regulations.
28. Boards of Studies. - (1) In the Cluster University there shall be a Board of Studies
for a subject or subjects comprised in a Faculty in accordance with the provisions of the
Regulations.
(2) Each Board of Studies shall consist of the following members, namely : -
(a) the Pro fessors of the Cluster University Department in the subject assigned to
the Board, if there are any ;
(b) the Associate Professors of the Cluster University Department in the subject
assigned to the Board, if there are any ;
(c) the Senior most Associate P rofessor, in case there is no Professor, from the
department in the subject concerned from each constituent college ;
(d) the Senior most Associate Professor, in case there is no Professor, from the
department in the subject concerned from each constituent autonomous/affiliated
college, not lower in rank than that of an Associate Professor ;
(e) one person who is not a teacher in any affiliated or constituent college of the
Cluster University or a Department of the Cluster University, nominated by the
Facul ty :
Provided further that where it is found that the Board of Studies in any subject is not
adequately represented, the Vice - Chancellor of the Cluster University may authorize
co-option of teachers in the subject from colleges or the Cluster University D epartments
to the extent of three members.
(3) Head of the Cluster University Department senior to all other Professors in the
department shall be the Convenor and in case there is no Professor of the Cluster
University Department in a subject, the Board o f Studies shall elect one of its members
as the Convenor of the Board.
(4) The terms and conditions of the office of the members of a Board of Studies shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Statutes in this behalf.
(5) Where a Board of Studies comprises more than one subject, the Vice -Chancellor
may constitute the Board on similar lines so as to ensure that each subject comprised in
the Board is adequately represented on it ; Provided that the total number of members
of the Board so constituted does not exceed ten.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or any Statute or Regulation
made thereunder, each Cluster University may have a Board of Postgraduate Studies
for each subject in which Postgraduate instructions are imparted, and a Board of
Undergraduate Studies for the subject or subjects in which undergraduate instructions
are imparted. The composition of these Boards shall be such as may be determined by
the Chancellor in consultation with the Vice -Chancellor of the Cluster University.
29. Functions and Powers of the Board of Studies. - (1) It shall be the duty of Board
of Studies to make suggestions to the Faculty concerned regarding : -
(a) Syllabi for the subject or subjects of instruction ;
(b) Combination of subjects permitted in var ious courses ;
(c) Identification of new courses of study ;
(d) Appointment of paper -setters and examiners ; and
(e) Any matter referred to it by the University Council, the Syndicate, the Academic
Council or the Faculty concerned.
(2) The Boards of Studie s shall also discharge such other functions as may be
prescribed by the Statutes or the Regulations.
30. Boards of Research Studies. - (1) There shall be Boards of Research Studies, one
each for Humanities, Science, Social Science and such other fields of study as may be
specified by the Syndicate after having consulted the Academic Council of the Cluster
University. Each Board shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, the Registrar, the Dean and
the Heads of the Cluster University Departments of the subjects c omprised in the
Faculty with power to co -opt members :
Provided that an expert in the subjects concerned may be invited to advise on a
particular matter relating to each subject. The co -opted members shall hold office for a
period of three years. The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex -officio Chairman of each Board
and in his absence, Dean of the faculty concerned shall act as Chairman and the
Registrar shall be the Member Secretary of the Board.
(2) Each Board shall organize research studies under the guidance of the Academic
Council and in accordance with the Statutes and Regulations prescribed in this behalf.
31. Powers and Functions of the Boards of Research Studies. - Each Board shall
have the following powers and functions, namely : -
(a) to conside r and grant applications for registration for the research degrees in the
light of the recommendations made by the Head of the Postgraduate Department
concerned ;
(b) to appoint supervisors for the guidance of research studies ;
(c) to prescribe to maximum number of research scholars to be guided by an
approved supervisor ;
(d) to submit to the Academic Council suggestions and proposals for organizing or
improvement of the research studies in the Cluster University ; and
(e) to consider any other matter ref erred to it by the Academic Council, the
Syndicate and the University Council.
32. Board of Inspection. - (1) There shall be a Board of Inspection in the Cluster
University consisting of the following members, namely : -
(a) A designated officer of the Clus ter University to be named as Dean, College
Development Council ;
(b) Principals of the constituent colleges of the Cluster University ; and
(c) Two Deans of Faculties of the Cluster University by rotation, nominated by the
Vice-Chancellor.
(2) The terms a nd conditions of the office of the members of the Board of Inspection
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes in this behalf.
33. Functions of the Board of Inspection. - (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act
and the Statutes and Regulations made thereunder, the Board of Inspection shall
perform the following functions : -
(a) receive all applications for recognition or affiliation of colleges and other teaching
institutions including all applications for recognition in new courses or subjects
referred to it by the Syndicate and cause an inspection to be made and lay its
report before the Syndicate for decision ;
(b) appoint inspectors for the inspection of a college once at least within a period of
three years after the grant of the privileges of an affiliated or' constituent college
or after the inspection last held, consider the report of the inspectors and forward
it to the Syndicate with its recommendations.
(2) The inspection of colleges and other teaching institutions applying for affiliation or
recognition shall be conducted by a Committee to be appointed by the Board of
Inspection. In the case of a college applying for recognition in new courses or subjects,
the Committee of Inspection shall consist of the following members : -
(a) One member of the Board of Inspection nominated by the Vice - Chancellor ;
(b) The Heads of the Cluster University Departments concerned, if there are any in
the subjects ; and
(c) The Dean of the Faculty concerned.
34. Selection Committees. - (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, there shall be
Selection Committees in the Cluster University comprising the following members for
selection of teachers and officers for appointment/ recognition in the Cluster University
:-
(A) Committees for appointme nt of teachers :
(a) For Associate Professors and Assistant Professors or equivalent
post. - The Committee for appointment of Associate Professors and
Assistant Professors shall be same as may be prescribed by the Regulations
of the University Grants Commission.
(b) For Professors, Associate Professors and Assistant Professors
equivalent post. - The Committee for appointment of Professors, Associate
Professors and Assistant Professors shall be same as may be prescribed by
the Regulations of the Univers ity Grants Commission ;
(B) Committee for Recognizing teachers for the Cluster University, amongst
the teachers of the Higher Education Department. - The Committee for
recognizing teachers for Cluster University from amongst the teachers of Higher
Educatio n Department shall consist of, -
(i) Vice -Chancellor (Chairman) ;
(ii) Dean of the Concerned Faculty of the University ;
(iii) Subject Expert to be nominated by the Academic Council of the University ;
(iv) A member of the Syndicate, nominated by the Vice -Chancellor ; and
(v) Registrar.
(C) Committee for appointment of the officers of the status of the Joint
Registrar, Deputy Librarian and above. - The Committee for appointment of
Joint Registrar and Deputy Librarian shall consist of, -
(i) Vice -Chancellor (C hairman) ;
(ii) Financial Advisor ;
(iii) Education Advisor ;
(iv) Senior most principal from amongst the constituent college of the Cluster
University ; and
(v) a member of the University Council, nominated by the Chancellor.
(D) Committee for appointment of officers below the status of the Joint Registrar and
Deputy Librarian. -The Committee for appointment of officers below the status of
the Joint Registrar and Deputy Librarian shall consist of : -
(i) Vice -Chancellor (Chairman) ;
(ii) Financial Advisor ;
(iii) Educational Advisor ;
(iv) A member of the Syndicate, nominated by the Vice -Chancellor ;
(v) Registrar.
(2) The majority of Members shall form the quorum of the Selection Committees as
provided under sub -section (1).
35. Other Authorities. - The constitution, powers and duties of such other authorities
as may be provided by the Statutes to be authorities of the Cluster University shall be
provided for in the manner prescribed by Statutes.
36. Audit of Accounts. - The Accounts of the Cluster University shall, once in every
year and at the intervals of not more than fifteen months be audited by auditors
appointed by the Government and a copy of the accounts together with the auditors`
report, shall be published in the Government Ga zette.
37. Alteration in the Designation of a Government Officer. - Where any provision of
this Act or the Statutes or Regulations refers to any officer of the Government by
designation then, if that designation is altered or the office held by such office r ceases
to exist, the reference to that designation shall be construed as reference to the altered
designation or as the case may be, to such corresponding officer as the Government
may direct.
38. Statutes. - Subject to the provisions of this Act, the St atutes may provide for all or
any of the following matters, namely : -
(a) the holding of Convocation by the Cluster University to confer degrees ;
(b) the conferment of Honorary Degree ;
(c) the institution of Fellowships, Scholarships, Exhibitions, Bursar ies, Medals and
Prizes ;
(d) the conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor and other officers of the Cluster
University ;
(e) the designation and powers of the officers of the Cluster University ;
(f) the constitution, powers and duties of the authoriti es of the Cluster University ;
(g) the conditions for recognition and affiliation of colleges and other institutions to
the Cluster University ;
(h) the classification of teachers employed by the Cluster University ;
(i) the constitution of pension or gene ral provident fund or contributory provident
fund or New Pension Scheme (NPS) for the benefit of the officers, teachers and
other servants employed by the Cluster University ;
(j) the conditions under which students shall be admitted, to the examinations
conducted by the Cluster University, and be eligible for degrees, diplomas or
certificates ;
(k) the fees to be charged for admission to the examinations and the Departments of
the Cluster University ;
(l) the conditions and mode of employment and the dutie s of examiners and paper
setters ;
(m) the conduct of examinations ;
(n) the admission of students to constituent and affiliated colleges ;
(o) the number, qualifications and emoluments of teachers employed by the Cluster
University ; and
(p) all matters w hich by this Act are to be or may be prescribed by the Statutes.
39. Statutes how made. - (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may be
amended or repealed or added to by Statutes made by the University Council in the
manner hereinafter ap pearing.
(2) The University Council may of its own motion take into consideration the draft of any
Statute submitted to it by one of its own members :
Provided that in any such case, before a Statute is passed, the opinion of the Syndicate
or if the draft of such a Statute affects the powers, duties or emoluments of any officer,
teacher, authority or board, a report from the person or body concerned together with
the opinion of the Syndicate shall be taken into consideration by the University Council.
(3) T he Syndicate of the Cluster University may propose to the University Council the
draft of any Statute to be passed by the University Council. Such draft shall be
considered by the University Council at its next meeting. The University Council may
approve s uch draft and pass the Statute, or may reject it, or may return it to the
Syndicate for reconsideration either in whole or in part, together with any amendments
which the University Council may suggest. After any draft so returned has been further
consider ed by the Syndicate together with any amendments suggested by the
University Council, it shall again be presented to the University Council with the report
of the Syndicate and the University Council may then deal with the draft in such manner
as it may th ink proper.
(4) (a) When the University Council has passed a Statute, it shall be submitted to the
Chancellor who may assent to it or may withhold his assent or may refer it back to the
University Council for further consideration.
(b) If the University Council rejects the draft of a Statute proposed by the Syndicate,
the draft shall be submitted to the Chancellor who may refer it back to the
University Council for further consideration.
(c) A Statute passed by the University Council shall not become valid until assent
thereto of Chancellor has been notified.
(5) The Syndicate shall not propose the draft of any Statute or of any amendment of a
Statute : -
(a) Affecting the status, powers or constitution of an authority of the Cluster
University u ntil such authority has been given an opportunity of expressing an
opinion upon the proposal. Any opinion so expressed shall be in writing and shall
be considered by the University Council and shall be submitted to the Chancellor ;
and
(b) Affecting the co nditions of recognition and affiliation of constituent, autonomous
and affiliated colleges to the Cluster University after consultation with the
Academic Council.
40. Regulations. - The authorities and the bodies of the Cluster University may
recommend to the Cluster University Council Regulations consistent with this Act and
the Statutes providing for all or any of the following matters : -
(a) the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members
required to form a quorum ;
(b) the notice to be given of the meetings and of business to be considered thereat,
the keeping of records of their proceedings and similar matters ;
(c) all matters which by this Act or the Statutes are to be prescribed by the
Regulations ;
(d) the condi tions of residence of students ;
(e) the discipline of students ;
(f) the classification or inclusion of subjects of study in various Faculties ;
(g) the constitution, powers and duties of the various Boards of the Cluster
University ;
(h) the periodical i nspection of constituent, autonomous or affiliated colleges and
other institutions.
41. Regulations how made. - (1) The University Council of the Cluster University shall
make Regulations in consultation with the Syndicate after receiving drafts from the
authorities and bodies of the Cluster University :
Provided that the University Council shall not consider the draft of any Regulations
regarding classification or inclusion of the subjects of study in the various Faculties,
otherwise than on the recommenda tions of the Academic Council.
(2) Regulations shall not be made for those matters which under Section 38 of this Act
may be provided for by the Statutes.
42. Annual Report. - The Annual Report of the Cluster University shall be prepared at
the close of a financial year under the directions of the Syndicate and shall be submitted
to and considered by the Cluster University Council.
43. Disputes as to Constitution of Cluster University Authorities or Bodies. - If any
question arises whether any person has be en duly elected, appointed or co -opted as, or
is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body of the Cluster University, or
whether any decision of the Cluster University or of any of its bodies, authorities or
committees is in conformity with t he Act, the Statutes or the Regulations, the matter
shall be referred to the Chancellor whose decision thereon shall be final.
44. Filling of Casual Vacancies. - (1) All casual vacancies among the members (other
than ex -officio members) of any authority or other body of the Cluster University shall be
filled, as soon as conveniently may be, by the persons or body who appointed, elected
or co -opted the member whose place has become vacant, and the person appointed,
elected or co -opted, to casual vacancy, sha ll be a member of such authority or body for
the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills, would have been a
member.
(2) A person who is a member of an Authority of the Cluster University as a
representative of another body whether of the Cluster University or outside, shall retain
his seat on the Cluster University Authority, so long as he continues to be member of
the body by which he was appointed or elected and thereafter till his successor is duly
appointed.
45. Proceedings of Clus ter University Authorities and Bodies not invalidated by
Vacancies. - No act or proceedings of any authority or other body or committee of the
Cluster University shall be invalidated merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or
vacancies among its mem bers or by reason of some person having taken part in the
proceedings who is subsequently found not to have been entitled to do so.
46. Appointment of Special Officer until Cluster University Authorities are duly
Constituted. - (1) At any time after the pa ssing of this Act and until such time as the
Cluster University shall have been duly constituted or until such time as the Chancellor
may desire, a special officer shall be appointed by the Chancellor for the University.
(2) Subject to the superintendence of the Vice -Chancellor, the Special Officer shall
frame the Statutes and Regulations as may be necessary to bring the Statutes and
Regulations in conformity with the provisions of this Act. The modifications, alterations
and additions proposed by the Special Officer shall, if approved by the Chancellor be
deemed to have been made by the competent authority under this Act and shall
continue to be in force until altered or superseded by the authority constituted under this
Act.
47. Affiliation of State Educational Institutions with the Cluster University. - (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the Statutes with regard to the
conditions of the recognition and affiliation of colleges and other educational insti tutions,
Government Degree College, Leh and Government Degree College, Nubra,
Government Degree College, Kargil, Government Degree College, Zanskar and
Government Degree College, Drass shall be constituent colleges of the Cluster
University, immediately af ter the Act comes into force :
Provided further that any new college established by Government in Ladakh region,
shall be affiliated/constituent college of this University.
(2) De -affiliation of the constituent colleges of the Cluster University from the p resent
affiliating Universities, viz., University of Kashmir shall be completed in a phased
manner to facilitate a smooth completion of the courses by the students already enrolled
in the constituent colleges as per their present affiliation.
48. Removal o f Difficulties. - If any difficulty arises as to the first constitution of any
authority of the Cluster University after the commencement of this Act, or otherwise in
giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Government may by order do anything
which appears to them necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
49. Transitional Provisions. - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any
Statute or Regulation made thereunder, the appointment of the first Vice -Chancellor,
and the first Registrar and the first Controller of Examination of the Cluster University
constituted under this Act shall be made by the Chancellor and, until the first
appointment as aforesaid is made, the Chancellor may make provisional appointments
on the said posts , on such terms and conditions and for such period, as he deems
appropriate.