an action of his own or of
his agent, deliberately or negligently, shall be liable to pay compensation to any other person
suffering any damage from such fire.

(2)

All claims under sub section (1) shall be referred

to the Director within thirty days
from the date when the damage was caused.

(3)

The Director shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the concerned
persons, may determine the amount of compensation and pass an order in this regard while fixi ng
the liability of the persons for paying such compensation. The order passed under this sub section
shall have the force of decree of a civil court and shall be implemented within thirty days from
the date of receipt of the order.

Liability of owner
to p ay
compensation.

28.

Any person who wilfully obstructs or interferes with any member of the Fire and
Emergency Services, who is engaged in fire fighting operations, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or wit h fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees, or with both.

Penalty for
wilfully
obstructing fire
fighting, rescue
operations.

29.

Any person who knowingly gives or causes to be given a false report of the outbreak of a
fire to any person authorized to

receive such report by means of a statement, message or
otherwise, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.

False report.

30.

Whoever contravenes any provi sions of this Act or any rule or notification made
thereunder except as provided specifically in this Act, shall without prejudice to any other action
taken against him under this Act and the rules made thereunder, be punishable with imprisonment
for a ter m which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, or with both and where the offence is a continuing one with a further fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees for everyday during which such offence continues.

Ge neral provision
for punishment.

31.

(1)

Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Company, every person
who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible for the
conduct of the affairs of the Company shall be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend
to three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both:

Offence by
companies.

HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.),
APR
.

, 20

(
CHTR
.

, 19

SAKA)

Provided that nothing contained in this sub section shall render any such person liable
to any punis hment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub section (1), where any offence under this
Act has b een committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, se cretary or other officer shall
also be liable for punishment as per sub section (1).

Explanation.

(i)

‘company’ means a body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and

(ii)
‘director’ means a director or a partner

of the firm.

Compounding
of offences.

32.

(1)

Any offence committed under this Act may either before or after the institution of the
prosecution, be compounded by such officer and for such amount, as the Government may, by
notification, specify in this b ehalf:

Provided that no offence shall be compounded unless the notices or orders issued
under this Act are complied with.

(2)

Where an offence has been compounded under sub section (1), no further
proceedings shall be taken against the offender in respe ct of such offence.

Protection of
action taken in
good faith.

33.

No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules made
thereu nder.

Cognizance of
prosecution.

34.

No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act, except on the complaint of or
upon information received from the
Director or concerned Fire Officer of the Fire and
Emergency Services.

Jurisdiction.

35.

T he Court of
Sub Divisional Magistrate shall try an offence punishable under this Act.

Appeal.

36.

(1)

Any person aggrieved by any notice or order of the Director or any other officer
authorised by him in this behalf may prefer an appeal against such not ice or order to the appellate
authority within a period of sixty days:

Provided that the appellate authority may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
such period if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that per iod.

(2)

An order passed by the appellate authority in the appeal shall be final.

Establishment
of fire and
emergency
training
institute.

37.

(1)

The Government may establish and maintain one or more training institutes in the
State of Haryana for provid ing courses of instructions in the prevention and extinguishment of fire
for the fire service personnel and private candidates from industries, high rize buildings and other
Government and Non Government establishments.

(2)

The Government may extend the
training facilities to the local bodies and industrial
undertakings as well as to the fire and emergency service of other States on payment of such fee
and charges, as may be prescribed.

(3)

The Government shall prescribe such procedure as it may deem fi t for providing a
course of instruction in the prevention and extinguishment of fire.

(4)

Subject to the observance of general rules applicable to other employees of the
Government in relation to training, the employees of the Fire and Emergency Services

may be sent
to training in the field of scientific and modern techniques of fire protection and fire safety
measures and allied matters in any institute within or out of India at the cost and expense of the
Government for the administration of the provisi ons of this Act.

Community
awareness and
training
programme.

38.

The Fire Officer shall conduct community awareness and training programmes on
preventive measures on fire and other emergencies. The Fire Officer may render assistance and
consultation to th e communities in matters related to fire prevention.

HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.),
APR
.

, 20

(
CHTR
.

, 19

SAKA)

39.

(1)

A fire tax shall be levied on buildings on which property tax is levied by any local
authority.

(2)

The fire tax shall be levied at such rate in terms of percentage of property tax as the
Go vernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine from time to time.

Levy of fire tax.

40.

(1)

The authorities empowered to assess, collect and enforce payment of property tax
under the law authorizing the local authority of the area to lev y such tax shall, on behalf of the
Government, assess, collect and enforce payment of the fire tax in the same manner, as the
property tax is assessed, paid and collected.

(2)

Such portion of the total amount of the fire tax as the Government may determi ne,
shall be deducted by the local authority to meet the cost of collection of the fire tax.

(3)

The net amount of the fire tax collected under this Act reduced by the cost of
collection of fire tax shall be paid to the Government, in such manner and at
such intervals, as
may be prescribed.

Mode of
assessment,
collection, etc. of
fire tax.

41.

(1)

Where members of the Fire and Emergency Services are deployed alongwith
equipment and appliances beyond the limits of State in order to extinguish a fire in
the
neighbourhood on the request of any Government or local body or Fire and Emergency
Services, such Government or local body or Fire and Emergency Services, as the case may
be, shall be liable to pay such charges as may be prescribed.

(2)

No members of
Fire and Emergency Services shall be deployed for the purpose
as mentioned under sub section (1) without prior permission of the Director or any other
officer authorized by him in this behalf who shall not be below the rank of Deputy Director
(Technical).

(3)

The fee referred to in sub section (1) shall be payable within one month of the
service of a notice of demand by the Director or any other officer authorized by the Director in
this behalf, as the case may be, and if it is not paid within that period
, it shall be recoverable as an
arrear of land revenue.

Charges on
deployment of
Fire and
Emergency
Services beyond
limits of State.

42.

(1)

N o charges shall be levied for extinguishing the fire and rescue operations within
the State.

(2)

The Government

shall, by notification specify the charges for deployment of
members of Fire and Emergency Services alongwith equipment and appliances for the private
purpose and for standby duty for a specific duration.

Charges on
deployment of
Fire and
Emergency
Servic es for Stand

by duty within
State.

43.

Any amount payable under this Act shall be recovered as arrears of land revenue.

Recovery of dues.

44.

The Director may, with the previous sanction of the Government, enter into an agreement
with any Fire and Emer gency Services or the authority which maintains the said Fire and
Emergency Services, beyond the limits of any area in which this Act is in force for providing
personnel or equipment or both, for fire fighting purposes, on such terms as may be provided by
or under the agreement on reciprocal basis in public interest.

Reciprocal fire
fighting
arrangements with
other Fire and
Emergency
Services.

45.

Without prejudice to the provisions of any other state law on the subject for the time being
in force, the Go vernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare any class or
category of
Fire and Emergency Services

as technical service.

Declaration of
Fire and
Emergency
Services as
technical service.

46.

The Director or any other officer authorized by

him in this behalf may, for the purpose
of discharging his duties under this Act, require the owner or occupier of any building to supply
information with respect to the character of such building, the available water supplies and means
of access thereto
and any other material particulars as he may deem necessary and such owner or
occupier shall be liable to furnish all information under his possession.

General power to
obtain
information.

47.

(1)

Where on receipt of a report from
Fire Officer
under secti ons 23 and 24, or
suo moto
, it appears to the Director or any officer authorized by him that the condition of any
building or premises is dangerous to life or property, he shall, without prejudice to any action
taken under this Act, by order, require the p erson in possession or occupation of such building to
remove them from such building forthwith.

Power to seal
buildings or
premises.

HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.),
APR
.

, 20

(
CHTR
.

, 19

SAKA)

(2)

If an order made by the Director or any officer authorized by him under sub section
(1) is not complied with, the D irector or any officer authorized by him may direct

(i)

to disconnect the supply of electricity of the building to concerned authority
and such authority shall comply with said directions;

(ii)

to disconnect the water and sewer of the building or premises

to the concerned
authority and such authority shall comply with such directions;

(iii)

any police officer having jurisdiction in the area to remove such persons from
the building and such officer shall comply with such directions.

(3)

After the removal
of the persons under clause (iii) of sub section (2), the Director or
any other officer authorized by him in this behalf shall seal the building.

(4)

No person shall remove such seal except under an order made by the Director or any
officer authorized by

him.

(5)

Any person who removes such seal except under an order made by the Director or
any officer authorized by him, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three months, or with fine which may extend to twenty five thousan d rupees, or with both.

Police officers
and others to
aid.

48.

In fire fighting operations or any other duties related to seizure, detention or removal of any
goods involving risk of fire on the request of the officer in charge of the fire fighting operat ion, it
shall be the duty of a police officer or employees of the police force to assist and aid
the officer in charge of the fire fighting operation
in performance of such duties.

Compensation
to member of
Fire and
Emergency
Services.

49.

If the member
of the
Fire and Emergency Services

become permanently disabled or dies
during discharging the fire fighting and rescue operation duties, the Government shall pay adequate
compensation to such member or to the next of kin of deceased, as the case may be as
specified by
the Government, by notification in the Official Gazette.

Officers to be
public servants.

50.

Every member of
Fire and Emergency Services
shall be deemed to be a public servant
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (
Central Act 45 of 1860).

Restriction to
form
association or
part of
association etc.

51.

(1)

No member of the Fire and Emergency Services shall without the previous sanction
of the Government:

(i)

be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any uni on, labour union
and political association;

(ii)

communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book,
letter or other document except where such communication or publication is in
the bonafide discharge of his duties or is of a purely l iterary, artistic or
scientific character.

Power to make
rules.

52.

(1)

The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying
out the provisions of this Act.

(2)

Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may

be, after it is made,
before the House of the State Legislature, while it is in session.

Delegation of
powers.

53.

The Director may, by order direct, that any power conferred or any duty imposed upon him,
by or under this Act, shall in such circumstances

and under such conditions, as may be specified in
the order, be exercised and performed by such officer as specified in the order.

Power to
remove
difficulties.

54.

(1)

If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Government
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made aft er the expiry of three years from the
commencement of this Act.

(2)

Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued,
before the House of State Legislature.

HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.),
APR
.

, 20

(
CHTR
.

, 19

SAKA)

55.

Notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith co ntained in any other State law for the
time being in force, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect.

Act to have
overriding effect.

56.

(1)

The Haryana Fire Service Act, 2009 (12 of 2009) is hereby repealed.

(2)

Nothing in this Act shall

affect

(i)

any right, interest or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred
before the commencement of this Act; or

(ii)

any legal proceedings or remedy in respect of such right, interest or
liability; or

(iii)

anything done or suffered before the
commencement of this Act; or

(iv)

any rule framed under the repealed Act which is not inconsistent with
this Act.

Repeal and
savings.

BIMLESH TANWAR
,

ADMINISTRATIVE
SECRETARY TO GOVERNM ENT
,

HARYANA,

LAW AND LEGISLATIVE
DEPARTMENT
.

—
L.R.
—
H.G.
P.,
Pkl
.