AN ACT
To provide for the constitution of Gram Panchayats, Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads
for better administration of the rural a reas and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Haryana in the Forth -fifty Year of the
Republic of India as follows: -
1. Short title, extent and commencement:

(1) This Act may be called the Haryana Panchayati Raj Act, 1994.

(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Haryana.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as State Government may, by notification, in the
Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Definition: -In this Act, unle ss the context otherwise requires: -

(i) “Additional Director” means an officer appointed by the Government to perform the
functions of an Additional Director under this Act.

(ii) “Audit means a person, male or female, who has attained the age of eighteen years;

(iii) “Assembly” means the Haryana Legislative Assembly.

(iv) “Backward Classes´ means such classes of citizens as may be specified by the
Government from time to time.

(v) “block” means such local area in a district as may be declared by the Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, to be a block at intermediate level;

(vi) “Block Development and Panchayat Officer” means an officer appointed as such by the
Government.

(vii) x x x x x x
(vii) x x x x x x
(ix) x x x x x x

(x) “casual vacancy” means a vacancy occurring otherwise than by efflux of time;

(xi) x x x x x x

(xii) “Chairman” means a Chairman of Panchayat Samiti elected under this Act

(xiii) “Chief Executive Officer “ means the Chief Executive Officer of a Zila Parishad;

(xiv) “Collector” means the Collector of a district in which the village is situated and includes
any officer appointed by the Government to perform the functions of a Collector under this
Act;

(xv) x x x x x x
(xvi) x x x x x x

(xvii) “competent Authority” means such Government officer or authority as the
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint to perform the functions
of a competent authority under this Act;

(xviii) “Deputy Commissioner” means the Deputy Commissioner of a district and includes
any officer not below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner appointed by the Government
to perform the functions of a Deputy Commissioner under this Act;

(xix) “Director” means the Director of Panchayats appointed under this Act.

(xx) “District” means a revenue district in the State of Haryana;

(xxi) “District Development and Panchayat Officer” means an officer appointed by the
Government to perform the functions of a District Development and Panchayat Officer
under this Act;

(xxii) x x x x x

(xxiii) “Executive Officer” means an Executive Officer of a Panchayat Samiti;

(xxiv) x x x x x

(xxv) Finance Commission” means the Finance Commission constituted under clause (I) of
article 243 -I of the Constitution of India;

(xxvi) “general election” means the election held under this Act for the constitution or
reconstitution of a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, as the case may
be, after the expiry of its term or otherwise;
(xxvii) “Government” means the Governmen t of the State of Haryana;

(xxix) “Gram Panchayat” means the Panchayat constituted at village level under this Act;

(xxx) “Gram Sabha” means a body consisting of persons registered as voters in the
electoral rolls of a village comprised within the area of the Panchayat at the village level;

(xxxi) x x x x x
(xxxii) x x x x x

(xxxiii) “Local Authority” means a Municipal Corporation, Municipal Council, Municipal
Committee, Cooperative Society, Market Society Improvement Trust, Cantonment Board,
Urban Development Authority, Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti, Zila Parishad, a Board
or Compa nyor Corporation financed or aided by Central or State Government;

(xxxiv) x x x x x

(xxxv) “ member” means a member of Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, as the case may
be;

(xxxvi) “municipality” means municipality as defined in the Haryana Municipal Act, 1973;

(xxvii) x x x x x
(xxxviii) x x x x x
(xxxix) x x x x x
(xl) x x x x x

(xli) “Panch” means a member of a Gram Panchayat elected under this Act ; Ommitted by
Haryana Act No. 10 of 1994

(xlii) “Panchayat area” means the territorial area of a Gram Panchayat;

(xliii) “ “Panchayat Samiti” means a Panchayat Samiti constituted for a block under this Act
and having jurisdiction over the block area as notified in the Official Gazette;

(xliv) “population” means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of
which the relevant figures have been published;

(xlv) “prescribed “ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(xlvi) “prescribed authority” means such authority as may be prescribed by rules made
under this Act;

(xlvii) “President” means a President of a Zila Parishad elected under this Act;
(xlviii) x x x x x
(xlix) x x x x x
(l) x x x x x

(li) “public servant” means a public servant as defined in section 21 of the Indian Panel
Code, 1860 (Central Act 45 of 1860) and shall include a Panch {ommitted by Haryana Act
No. 10 of 1999 } Sarpanch, member of Panchayat Samiti or zila Parishad, Chairman or Vice
Chairman and President or Vice President.

(lii) x x x x x

(liii) “qualifying date” means the Ist day of January the year in which the list of voters for
the purposes of the general election of members for constituting or reconstituting a Gram
panchayat , Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad as the case may be is prepared or revised
under the provisions of this Act;

(liv) “Sabha area” means an area declared to be Sabha area under this Act;
(lv) x x x x x
(lvi) “Sarpanch” means a Sarpanch of Gram Panchayat elected under this Act;
(lvii) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Act;
(lviii) “Schedule Caste” means such castes, races or tribes or part of or groups within, such
castes, races or tribes as are deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to the State of
Haryana under artilce 341 of the Constitution of India;

(lix) x x x x x
(lx) x x x x x

(lxi) “State Election Commission” means the State Election Commission constituted under
article 243K of the Constitution of India;

(lxii) x x x x x

(lxiii) “Sub Divisional Officer” means an officer -in-charge of a Sub Division of a district
constituted for revenue and general purposes;

(lxiv) x x x x x

(lxv) “territorial constituency” means a ward in which a village or group of villages or a
Block or a District is divided for the purposes of election of Gram Panchayat, Panchayat
Samiti and Zila Parishad;

(lxvi) x x x x x
(lxvii) “Vice -Chairman” means a Vice Chairm an of a Panchayat Samiti elected under this
Act;

(lxiii) “Vice President” means a Vice President of a Zila Parishad elected under this Act;

(lxix) “Village” means a revenue estate in the revenue records of a district in which it is
situated or a village as may be specified, by notification in the Official Gazette, by the
Government;

(lxxii)”Zila Parishad” means a Zila Parishad constituted at district level under this Act.
(lxxiii)” Zila Parishad Fund” means the Zila Parishad Fund under this Act.
General provisions applicable to Gram Panchayats, Panchayat Samitis and Zila
Parishad

3. Duration of Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti and Zila Parishad:

(1) Every Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti and Zila Parishad unless sooner dissolved
under any law for the time bein g in force, shall continue for five years from the date
appointed for its first meeting and no longer.

Provided that al the Gram Panchayats and Panchayat Samitis existing immediately on the
commencement of the Constitution (Seventy -third) Amendment) Act, 1992 shall continue
till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that
affect by the Assembly.

(2) An election to constitute a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti and Zila Parishad, as
the case may be, shall be complete d:-

(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in sub-section(I);

(b) before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution;

Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Gram Panchayat,
Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, as the case may be, would have continued is less than
six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election for constituting the Gram
Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad for such period as the case may be;

(3) A Gram Panchayat, Pa nchayat Samiti or Zila Paishad constituted upon the dissolution
of a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti, Zila Parishad before the expiration of its duration
shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Gram Panchayat,
Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad , as the case may be would have continued under sub-
section (i) had it not been so dissolved.

(4) If a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad as the case may be is not
reconstituted before the expiratio n of its duration laid down in sub -section (1) , it shall be
deemed to have been dissolved on the expiry of the said duration and, thereupon,
provisions of sub -section (2) of Section 52., sub -section (1) of Section 111 or sub -section
(4) of section 158, as the case may be, shall be applicable.

4. Oath:

(1) Before entering upon the duties of their offices as Panches, Sarpanches, members,
Chairmen, Vice Chairmen, President or Vice Presidents, as the case may be, they shall
taken an oath of allegiance or make affirmation in the Form specified in Schedule 1.

(2) If any person mentioned in sub-section (1) refuses to take or make oath or affirmation,
his election shall be deemed to be invalid and a fresh election shall be held.

(3) No pers on whose election is deemed to be invalid under this Section, shall be eligible
for election to any Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, as the case may
be, for a period of two years from the date on which he ought to have taken or made oath
or affirmation.

5. Resignation:

A Panch, Sarpanch, member, Chairman, Vice -Chairman, President or Vice President as the
case may be may resign his office by giving in writing his intention to do so to the Director
and on such resignation being accepted he shall be deemed to have vacated his office.

6. Filling of casual vacancy:

(1) Whether a vacancy occurs by death, resignation removal or otherwise of a Panch,
Sarpanch, member, Chairman, Vice Chairman, President or Vice –President as the case
may be , a new Panch, Sarpanch, member, Chairman, Vice Chairman, President or vice
President, as the case may be shall be elected in the manner as may be prescribed.

(2) Any person elected to fill up a vacancy under this section shall hold office for the
unexpired portion of the term for which the person in whose place he is elected would have
otherwise continued in office.

SABHA, AREA ESTABLISHMENT AND CONSTITUTION OF GRAM SABHA AND GRAM
PANCHAYATS .

7. Demarcation of sabha area:

(1) The Government may, by notification, declare any village or a part of a village or group
of contiguous villages with a population of not less than five hundred to constitute one or
more sabha areas:

8. Establishment and constitution of Gram Panchayat:

(1) The Government may, by notification, establish a Gram Panchayat by name in every
sabha area.

(2) Every Gram Panchayat shall consist of: -
a) Sarpanch who shal be elected by the Gram Sabha from amongst its voters, by secret
ballot;

b) Six to twenty Panches f rom wards in a Panchayat area in the manner prescribed.

c) (Ommitted by Haryana Act No. 10 of 1999)

d) All the above seats referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall be filled in by persons
chosen by direct election from the wards in the Panchayat area and for this purpose each
Panchayat area shall be divided into wards in such manner that the ratia between the
population of each ward and number of the seats of Panches allotted to it shall, so far as
possible , be the same throughout the Panchayat area.

9. Reservation of seats in Gram Panchayat:

(1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes in every Gram Panchayat and the
number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the
total number of seats to be filed by election in that Panchayat as the population of the
Scheduled Castes in the Panchayat area bears to the total population of that area and
such seats may be allotted to such wards having maximu m population of persons
belonging to Scheduled Caste.

(2) Not less than one -third of the total number of seats reserved under sub -section (1)
shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and such seats may be
allotted by rotation and by lots to different wards reserved under sub -section (1).

(3) Not less than one-third (including the numbers of seats reserved for women belonging
to the Scheduled Castes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every
Panchayat, shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation and by
lots to different wards in a Panchayat except those falling under sub -section (1) and (2).

(4) The offices of the Sapanches in the Gram Panchayat in a block shall be reserved for
the Scheduled Castes and Women:

Provided that the number of offices of Sarpanches reserved for the Scheduled Castes in the
Block shall bear, as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such offices in the
Block as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State bears to the total population
of the State:

Provided further that not less than one third of the total number of offices of Sarpanches
in the block shall be reserved for women in cluding one third offices of women Sarpanches
from Scheduled Castes:

Provided further that the number of offices of Sarpanches reserved under this sub -section
shall be rotated to different Gram Panchayats first having the largest maximum population
of Scheduled Castes and secondly having the second largest maximum population of such
classes and so on.

(5) The reservation of the seats under sub-section (1) and (2) and the reservation of office
of Sarpanches (other than the reservation of women) under sub -section (4) shall cease to
have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334 of the Constitution of
India.

(6) Every Panchayat shall have one Panch belonging to Backward Classes if th eir
population is two per centum or more of the total population of the sabha area and such
seat shall be allotted to such ward having maximum population of persons belonging to
Backward Classes.

(7) Reservation of seats as mentioned in aforesaid sub -sections shall be reviewed after
every decennial census.

10. Term of Office:

The term of office of Sarpanch shall be five years unless removed otherwise.}

CONTROL

51. Suspension and removal of a Sarpanch {x x x} or Panch:

(1) The Director or the Deputy Commissioner concerned may, suspend any Sarpanch
{Omitted by Haryana Act No. 10 of 1999) or Panch, as the case may be: -

(a) Where a case against him in respect of any criminal offence is under investigation,
enquiry or trial, if in the opinion of the Director or Deputy Co mmissioners concerned the
charge made or proceeding taken against him, is likely to embarrass him in the discharge
of his duties or involves moral turpitude or defect of character;

(b) During the course of an enquiry for any of the reasons for which he can be removed,
after giving him adequate opportunity to explain.

(2) Any Sarpanch or Panch, as the case may be, suspended under sub -section (1) shall
not take part in any act or proceeding of the Gram Panchayat during the period of his
suspension and shall hand ov er the records, money or any other property of the Gram
Panchayat in his possession or under his control: -

(i) if he is a Sarpanch to a Panch commanding majority in the Gram Panchayat;

(ii) if he is a Panch to Sarpanch:

Provided that the suspension period of a Panch or a Sarpanch, as the case may be, shall
not exceed one year from the date of handing over the charge in pursuance of the
suspension order except in criminal cases involving moral turpitude.}

(3) The Director or the Deputy Commissioner concerned may, af ter such enquiry as he
may deem fit and after giving an opportunity of being heard to a Sarpanch or {{Omitted
by Haryana Act No. 10 of 1999) a Panch, as the case maybe, ask him to show cause against
the action proposed to be taken against him, and by order remove him from his office: -
(a) if after his election he is convicted by a criminal court for an offence involving moral
turpitude and punishable with imprisonment for a period exceeding six months;

(b) if he was disqualified to be a member of the Gram Panchayat at the time of his election;

(c) if he incurs any of the disqualification mentioned in section 175 after his election as
member of the Gram Panchayat;

(d) if he is absent from five consecutive meetings of the Gram Panchayat without prior
permission or leave of Gram Pachayat; and

(e) if he has been guilty of misconduct in the discharge of his duties and his continuance
in the office is undersirable in the public interest.

(4) A person who has been removed under sub -section (3) may be disqualified for re -
election for such period as may be mentioned in the order but not exceeding the period of
six years.

(5) Any person aggrieved by an order passed under sub -sections (1) (3) and (4) may
within a period of thirty days from the communication of the order, prefer an appeal to the
Government.

(6) Any Sapanch or Panch, as the case may be, removed under sub-section (3) shall hand
over the records, money or any other property of the Gram Panchayat in his possession or
under his control: -

(i) if he is Sarpanch to a Panch commanding majority in the Gram Panchayat;

(i-a) if he is Sarpanch belonging to reserve category, to a Panch of that reserve category
commanding majority, and if no Panch in that category is available, to a Panch of General
Category commanding majority in the Gram Panchayat; and

(ii) if he is a Panch to Sapanch}

52. Dissolution of Gram Panchayat: -

1. if, in the opinion of the Government, a Gram Panchayat abuses its powers or is not
competent to perform or makes persistent defaults in the performance of its duties under
this Act or wilfully disregards any instructions given or directions issued by the P anchayat
Samiti or Zila Parishad or any instructions issued by competent authority arising out of the
audit of accounts of the Gram Panchayat or inspection of the work, the Government may,
after giving the Gram Panchayat an opportunity to render explanatio n, by an order
published, with the reasons thereof, in the Official Gazette, dissolve such Gram Panchayat.

2. When a Gram Panchayat is dissolved under sub -section (1):-

(i) Sarpanch {{Omitted by Haryana Act No. 10 of 1999) and all Panches shall vacate their
office forthwith;
(ii) all powers and duties of the Gram Panchayat during its dissolution, shall be
exercised and performed by such person or persons as the Government may appoint
in this behalf; and

(iii) all property in the possession of the Gram Panchayat shall be held by Government.

3. Upon dissolution of Gram Panchayat under sub -section (1), the Government shall
reconstitute a Gram Panchayat as specified under section 8 and election to reconstitute
such Gram Panchayat shall be completed before the expirati on of a period of six months
from the date of dissolution;

Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Gram Panchayat
would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election
under this sub-section for reconstituting the Gram Panchayat for such period.

4. A Gram Panchayat reconstituted upon the dissolution of the existing Gram Panchayat
before the expiration of its duration, shall continue only for the remainder of the period for
which the dissolved Gram Panchayat would have continued under section 3 had it not been
so dissolved.

PANCHAYAT SAMITI

55. Creation of Block:

(1) The Government may, by notification, divide a district into blocks each of which shall
comprise such areas as may be specified in the notification.

(2) The notification under sub -section (1) shall specify the name of the block by which it
shall be known and shall specify the local limits of such block.

(3) The Government may {{Omitted by Haryana Act No. 10 of 1999) by notific ation: -

(a) exclude from any block or include in any block any village or Gram Panchayat;

(b) divided the area of a block so as to constitute two or more blocks; or

(c) unite the areas of two or more blocks so as to constitute a single block.

56. Constitution of Panchayat Samiti:

The Government shall, by notification, constitute a Panchayat Samiti having jurisdiction,
save and except as otherwise provided for in this Act, in a block excluding such portion of
the block as are included in a municipa lity or in a cantonment or under the authority or a
Municipal Corporation constituted under any law for the time being in force:

Provided that a Panchayat Samiti may have its office in any area comprised within the
excluded portion of the block.

57. Composit ion of Panchayat Samiti:
(1) Every Panchayat Samiti shall consist of:

(a) directly elected members from territorial constituencies as determined under section
of this Act in the manner as may be prescribed;

(b) the members of Haryana Legislative Assembly representing constituencies which
comprise wholly or partly in the Panchayat Samiti, who shall have right to vote in the
meeting of the Panchayat Samiti except for election and removal of Chairman and Vice
Chairman and shall be {ex -officio members}

(2) There shall be a Chairman and a Vice Chairman in every Panchayat Samiti, who shall
be elected by and from amongst the elected Members, in the manner as may be prescribed.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section but subject to an y general or
specified order of the Government, where two-third of the total number of members of any
Panchayat Samiti required to be elected, have been elected, the Panchayat Samiti shall be
deemed to have been duly constituted under this Act.

58. Number of members to be elected to Panchayat Samiti:

(1) The number of elected members of a Panchayat Samiti shall consist of persons elected
from the territorial constituencies in the Panchayat Samiti area which shall not be less than
ten and not more than thirty as may be notified from time to time by the Government at
the scale of :-

(a) one member for every four thousand population or part thereof; of the Panchayat
Samiti area having population upto forty thousand;

Provided that the total number of members in such Panchayat Samiti shall not be less than
ten; and

(b) one member for every five thousand population or part thereof, of the Panchayat Samiti
area, having population of more than forty thousand;

Provided that the total number of members in such Panchayat Samiti shall not be less than
ten and more than thirty.

(2) For the purpose of election of the Panchayat Samiti, the Government may, in
accordance with such rules as may be prescribed in this behalf, divide the block area into
territorial constituencies in su ch manner, than the population of each ward shall, as far as
may be practicable , be the same throughout the block area.

(3) Each ward shall elect one member through direct election in the manner as may be
prescribed.

59. Reservation of seats:

(1) Seats shall be reserved for Scheduled Castes in every Panchayat Samiti and the number
of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total
number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Panchayat Samiti as the population of
the Scheduled Castes in that Panchayat Samiti area bears to the total population of that
area and such seats may be allotted to such wards having maximum population of persons
belonging to Scheduled Castes.

(2) Not less than one third of the total number of seats reserved under sub -section (1)
shall be reserved for women belonging to Scheduled Castes and such seats may be allotted
by rotation and by lots amongst the wards reserved under sub -section (1).

(3) Not less than one third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging
to the Scheduled Castes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every
Panchayat Samiti, shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation
and by lots to different territorial constituencies in a Panchayat Samiti except those falling
under sub -sections (1) and (2).

(4) The offices of Chairman in the Panchayat Samiti in a district shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and women by r otation and by lots:

Provided that the number of offices of Chairman reserved for Scheduled Castes in the
District shall bear as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such
offices in the Panchayat Samitis as the population of the Sc heduled Castes in the State
bears to the total population of the State:

Provided further that not less than one -third of the total number of offices of Chairpersons
of Panchayat Samitis in a district shall be reserved for women including the offices of
Scheduled Caste women:

Provided further that the number of offices of Chairman under this sub -section shall be
rotated to different Panchayat Samitis firstly having the largest maximum po pulation of
Scheduled Caste and secondly having the next largest maximum population of such classes
and so on.

(5) One seat shall be reserved for the persons belonging to Backward Classes in every
Panchayat Samiti which shall be allotted in such territorial constituencies as having
maximum population of persons belonging to Backward Classes.

(6) The reservation of seats under sub -sections (1) and (2) and the reservation of offices
of Chairman (other than the reservati on for women) under sub -section (4) shall cease to
have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334 of the constitution of
India :

Provided that reservation of seats under sub -sections (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) shall be
reviewed after every decennial census:

60. First meeting of Panchayat Samiti and Election of Chairman and Vice
Chairman:

(1) On the constitution of Panchayat Samiti under Section 56 or under any other provisions
of this Act, there shall be called the first meeting thereof for the election of Chairman and
Vice Chairman by and from amongst its elected members in the manner prescribed by the
prescribed authority.
(2) The meeting shall be held on such day within four weeks from the date on which the
names of members elected at the election are notified in the official gazette by the State
Election Commissioner or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf.

62. Term of office of Chairman and Vice-Chairman:

(1) The term of office of Chairman and Vice -Chairman of a Panchayat Samiti shall be five
years:

Provided that the Chairman or Vice Chairman shall cease to be the Chairman or Vice
Chairman if by a resolution passed by not less than two thirds of the total number of its
elected members, the Panchayat Samiti decides at a meeting convened in the manner
prescribed that he shall vacate his office:

Provided further that no such meeting shall be convened before the expiry of one year from
the date on which the election of the Chairman or vice Chairman, as the case may be, was
notified and, after the expiry of such period, whenever such a meeting is convened during
his term of office and the proposal for vacating the office fails, no further meeting shall at
any time thereafter be convened for considering a similar proposal against the Chairman
or vice Chairman unless a period of at least one year intervenes between the last failure
and the date on which such further meeting is convened.

(2) An outgoing Chairman or Vice Chairman shall be eligible for fresh election if otherwise
qualified.

63. Leave of absence:

(1) Any Member of a Panchayat Samiti who during his term of office absents himself from
four consecutive meetings of the Panchayat Samiti without the leave of the said Panchayat
Samiti , shall cease to be a member and his office shall be deem to have become vacant
and thereupon the Panchayat Samiti shall , as soon as may be, inform him, Zila Parishad,
State Election Commission and Government accordingly.

(2) Any dispute as to whether a vaca ncy has or has not occurred under this section shall
be referred for decision to the competent authority, whose decision shall be final;

Provided that such reference shall not be entertained if it is made after the expiry of fifteen
days from the date on which the Panchayat Samiti informs under sub -section (1).

(3) whenever leave is granted under sub -section (1) to a member who is Vice -Chairman
another member shall be elected to perform all the duties and exercise all the powers of a
Vice-Chairman during the period for which such leave is granted on the same terms and
conditions.

64. Suspension of Chairman/Vice Chairman and member:

(1) The Government may suspend from office any Chairman or Vice Chairman or member
against whom any criminal proceeding in respect of an offence involving moral turpitude
have been instituted in any court, or who has been detained in a prison during trial for any
offence or who is undergoing such sentence of imprisonment as would disqualify him for
continuing as a member of the Panchayat Samiti under Section 175 or who has been
detained under any law relating to preventive detention for the time being in force.

(2) Where any Chairman or Vice Chairman, as the case may be has been suspended under
sub-section (1) another member shall be elected by and from amongst the elected
members to perform all the duties and exercise all the powers of a Chairman or a Vice
Chairman during the period for which such suspension continues.

CONDUCT OF BUSINESS AND PANCHAYAT SAMITI

68. Quorum:

For the transaction of business at a meeting of a Panchayat Samiti, the quorum shall be:

(a) if it is an ordinary meeting, one -third; and

(b) If it is special meeting, one half of the number of members actually
serving for the time being.
69. Power of Chairman and Executive Officer to call special meetings:

The Chairman, or in his absence the Executive Officer may whenever he thinks fit and shall
on requisition made in writing by not less then one third of the total number members of
the Panchayat Samiti, convince a special meeting within two weeks of the receipt of the
written requisition.

70. Adjournment:

Any meeting of a Panchayat Samiti may, with the consent of the majority of the members
present, be adjourned to any other date, but no business other than that left over at the
adjourned meeting shall be transacted at the next following meeting.

SUPERVISION

109. Suspension & Removal of Members: - (1) The Government may, during the course
of any inquiry suspend a member, Vice Chairman or Chairman as the case may be, of a
Panchayat Samiti or any of the reasons for which he can be removed and debar him from
taking part in any act or proceedings of the said body, during the inquiry:

Provided that the suspension period of a member, Vice Chairman or Chairman as the case
may be shall not exceed six months from the date of issuance of suspension order.

(2) The Government may, after such inquiry as it may deem fit, remove any member, Vice
Chairman or Chairman, as the case may be, who in the opinion of the Government has
been guilty of misconduct in the discharge of his duties.
(3) A person who has been removed under sub -section (2) may be disqualified for re -
election for s uch period not exceeding five years as the Government may fix.

110. Powers of Government to dissolve in case of incompetency, persistent
default or abuse of power:

If a Panchayat Samiti is not competent to perform or persistently makes default in the
performa nce of the duties imposed upon it by or under this or any other Act for the time
being in force or exceeds or abuses its powers, the Government may suo motu or on a
report received in this behalf and after giving an opportunity to the Panchayat Samiti
concerned to show cause why such a order should not be made, by notification, dissolve
such Panchayat Samiti.

111. Consequences of dissolution:

(1) When a Panchayat Samiti is dissolved under Section 110, the following consequences
shall ensure: -

(a) all members of the Panchayat Samiti, from the date of the notification, vacate the
office.

(b) All powers and duties of the Panchayat Samiti may, until the Panchayat Samiti is
reconstituted be exercised and performed by such person or persons as the Government
may appoint in this behalf; and

(c) All property vested in the Panchayat Samiti, until it is reconstituted vest in the
Government.

(2) When a Panchayat Samiti is dissolved u nder Section 110 the Government shall
constitute Panchayat Samiti in its place before the expiration of a period of six months from
the date of its dissolution for the remainder period:

Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat Samiti
would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election
under this sub -section for constituting the Panchayat Samiti for such period.

(3) Any person or persons appointed under clause (b) of sub -section (1) shall be subject
to the control of the Government and such other officers as it may direct, and shall be
subject to all other restrictions, limitations and conditions imposed by t his Act on the
Panchayat Samiti, its Chairman or Executive Officer.

ZILA PARISHAD

117. Constitution of Zila Parishad:

(1) The Government may, by notification, constitute a Zila Parishad bearing the name of
the district having jurisdiction, save as otherwise provided in this Act, over the entire district
excluding such portion of the district as are included in a Municipality or Contonment:
Provided That the Zila Parishad may have its office in any area comprised within the
excluded portion of the dist rict.

(2) The Government may, after making such enquiry as it may deem fit and after
consulting the Zila Parishad or the Zila Parishads concerned, as the case may be, by
notification, exclude from any district or include in any district any village or Gram
Panchayat or a block.

118. Composition of Zila Parishads:

(1) Every Zila Parishad shall consist of:

(a) the members directly elected from the wa rds in a district under Section 119.

(b) the chairman of all Panchayat Samitis within the district, ex -officio members;

(c) the members of the House of People , Haryana Legislative Assembly whose constituency
lie within the district or part thereof, ex -officio member; and

(d) a President and Vice President who shall be elected by and amongst the elected
members of the Zila Parishad.

(2) All ex -officio members of the zila Parishad shall have right to vote in the meetings of
the Zila Parishad except for election and removal of the President or the Vice President.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, but subject to any general or
special order of the Government where two -third or more of the total number of members
of any Zila P arishad require to be elected have been elected, the Zila Parishad shall be
deemed to have been duly constituted under this Act.

119. Elected Members:

(1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine the number,
being not more than thirt y and not less than ten of directly elected members from wards
keeping in view the total population of the district at the scale of one member for every
40,000 population or part thereof.

(2) For the convenience of election, the Government shall, in accordanc e with such rules
as may be prescribed in this behalf: -

(a) divide a district into wards in such manner, that the population of each ward shall as
for as may be practicable, be the same throughout the district:

Provided that the elected members of a Zila Parishad from the wards in the blocks in the
district shall consist of persons to be elected from each block and the wards therein being
fixed in accordance with the scale of one member for every forty thousand population or
part thereof the population exc ept Morni Block in district Ambala and Sadhaura block in
district Yamuna Nagar where it shall constitute one ward for the actual population below
forty thousands.
(b) each ward shall elect one member through direct election in the manner prescribed.

120. Reservation of seats:

(1) Seats shall by reserved by the Government for the Scheduled Castes in every zila
Parishad in the State and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be
the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Zila
Parishad as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the district bears to the total
population in the district and such seats shall be allotted territorial constituencies in that
district having maximum population of perso ns belonging to Scheduled Castes.

(2) One third of the total number of seats reserved under sub-section (1) shall be reserved
for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and such seats may be allotted by rotation
to wards reserved under sub -section (1).

(3) One third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in a Zila
Parishad shall be reserved for women and such seats shall be allotted by rotation and by
lots to different constituencies in that district except those falling in sub -sections (1) and
(2).

(4) The offices of the President in the Zila Parishad shall be reserved for th e scheduled
Castes and women.

Provided that the number of offices of the Presidents reserved for the Scheduled Castes in
the State shall bear as may be the same proportion to the total number of such offices in
the Zila Parishad as the population of the S cheduled Castes in the state bears to the total
population of the State:

Provided further that not less than one third of the total number of offices of Presidents in
the Zila Parishads shall be reserved for women including the offices reserved for Schedu led
Caste Women:

Provided further that the number of offices of presidents under this sub -section shall be
rotated to different Zila Parishad firstly having the largest maximum population of
Scheduled Castes and secondly having the next largest maximum po pulation of such
classes and so on.

(5) The reservation of seats under sub-section (1) and (2) and the reservation of offices of
Presidents (other than the reservation of women) under sub-section (4) shall cease to have
effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334 of the Constitution of India.

(6) One seat in every Zila Parishad shall be reserved for the persons belonging to backward
Classes and such seat shall be allotted to such wards having maximum population of person
belonging to Backward Classes.

Provided that reservation of seats under sub -sections (1), (2) (3) (4) and (6) shall be
reviewed after every decennial census.

121. First meeting of Zila Parishad and election of President and Vice President:
(1) On the Constitution of a Zila Parishad under section 117, there shall be called the first
meeting for the election of President and the Vice President by and from amongst its elected
members in the manner prescribed , by the prescribed authority.

(2) The meeting shall be held on such day within four weeks from the date on which the
names of elected members are published by the State Election Commissioner, or any other
officer authorised by him in this behalf.

123. Term of the officer of President and Vice President and Motion of No-
Confidence against President and Vice President:

(1) The term of the office of President and Vice President of a Zila Parishad shall be five
years unless sooner removed.

(2) If by a resolution passed against the President or Vice President, as the case may be,
two third of the total number of its elected members of the Zila Parishad decide at a meeting
convened by the Prescribed Authority in the manner prescribed, that the President or Vice
President, as the case may be, shall vacate the office and in such case the Zila Parishad
shall elect the new President or Vice President as the case may be, as specified in section
of this Act.

Provided that no such meeting shall be convened before the expiry of one year from the
date on which the election of the President or the Vice-President as the case may be, was
notified and after the expiry of such period, whenever such a meeting is convened during
his term of office and the proposal for vacating the office fails, no furter meeting shall at
any time thereafter be convened for considering a similar proposal against the President or
Vice President unless a period of at least one year intervenes between the last failure and
the date on which such further meeting is convened.

124. Leave of absence:

(1) Any member of a Zila Parishad who during his term of office:

(a) is absent for more than three consecutive months from the district unless leave not
exceeding three months so as to absent himself has been granted by the Zila Parishad; or

(b) absents himself from four consecutive meetings of the Zila Parishad without the leave
of the said Zila Parishad shall cease to be a member and his office shall be vacant and
thereupon the Zila Parishad shall, as soon as may be, inform him that the vacancy has
occurred.

(2) Any dispute as to whether a vacancy has or has not occurred under this section shall
be referred for decision to the competent authority whose decision shall be final.

Provided that such reference shall not be entertained if it is made after the expiry of fifteen
days from the date on which the Zila Parishad informs under sub-section (1) t the member
as to the vacancy.

(3) Whenever leave is granted under sub -section (1) to a member who is Vice President,
another member shall subject to the condition to which the election of the Vice President,
so absenting himself was subject, be elected to perform all the duties and exercise all the
powers of a Vice President during the period for which leave is granted.

CONDUCT OF BUSINESS

126. Meetings:

A Zila Parishad shall ordinarily meet at least six times in each year for the transaction of
its business and not more than two months shall be allowed to lapse between any two
successive meetings.

127. Convening of ordinary or special meeting:

(1) A meeting of a Zila Parishad shall be either ordinary or special.

(2) Any business may be transacted at an ordinary meeting unless required by this Act or
the rules made there under to be transacted at a special meeting. The date of every
meeting, except the mee ting referred to in sections 121 and 123 shall be fixed by the
President, or in his absence by the Vice President. Notice of every meeting specifying the
date, time and place thereof and the businss to be transacted thereat shall be despatched
to every mem ber of the Zila Parishad and exhibited at the office of the Zila Parishad not
less than ten days before an ordinary meeting and four days before a special meeting.

128. Quorum:

For the transaction of business at a meeting of a Zila Parishad, the quorum shall be:-

(a) if it is an ordinary meeting, one third ; and

(b) if it is special meeting, one half, of the member of members actually serving for the
time being.

SUPERVISION OF ZILA PARISHAD

160. Suspension and removal of President, Vice President and member:

(1) (a) The Government may suspend any President or Vice President or member, as the
case may be, where a case against him/her in respect of any criminal offence is under
investigation, inquiry or trial and if, in the opinion of the Government, the charge made, or
proceedings taken against him/her are likely to embarrass him/her in the discharge of
duties or involves moral turpitude or defect of character;

(b) The Government may during the course of enquiry suspend any President or Vice
President or member , as the case may be , for any of the reasons mentioned in sub-section
(2) for which he can be removed after giving him adequate opportunity;

© Any President or Vice President or member, as the case may be suspended under this
sub-section shall not take part in any act or proceeding of the Zila Parishad or a committee
during the period of his suspension and shall hand over the records, money or any other
property of the Zila Parishad in his possession or under his control to: -

(i) Vice-President, if he is President;

(ii) President, if he is Vice President; and

(iii) If both the President and Vice President are suspended to a member commanding
majority in the Zila Parishad.

Provided that the suspension period of a member, Vice President or President as the case
may be, shall not exceed six months from the date of issuance of suspension order.

(2) The Government may, after such inquiry as it may deem fit and after giving an
opportunity to a President or Vice President or a member as the case may be, to show
cause against the actio n proposed to be taken against him, by order in writing , remove
him from his office: -

(a) if after his election he is convicted by a criminal court for an offence involving moral
turpitude and punishable with imprisonment for a period of more than six months;

(b) if he was disqualified to be member of the Zila Parishad at the time of his election;

(c) if he incurs any of the disqualification mentioned in section 175 after his election as
member of the Zila Parishad;

(d) if he absents himself for more than four consecutive, ordinary meeting of the Zila
Parishad without the leave of the Zila Parishad or is absent from the Zila Parishad area for
more than three consecutive months;

(e) who has been guilty of misconduct in the discharge of his duties and his continuance
in the office is undesirable in the public interest

(3) A person who has been removed under sub -section (2) may be disqualified for re -
election for such period as may be specified in the order but not exceeding six years.

(4) Any President or Vice President or member, as the case may be, removed under sub-
section (2) shall hand over the records, money or any other property of the Zila Parishad
in his possession or under his control to:

(i) Vice President, if he is President;

(ii) President, if he is a Vice President;

(iii) If both the President and Vice President are removed to a member commanding
majority in the Zila Parishad.

ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF GRAM PANCHAYAT, PANCHAYAT SAMITI AND ZILA
PARISHAD AND ELECTION DISPUTES ETC.
161. Election of Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishad: - (1) As soon
as, a notification is issued under this Act by the Government, the election of Panches and
Sarpanches of Gram Panchayat, members, Chairmen and Vice -Chairmen of Panchayat
Samitis and members, Presidents and Vice -Presidents of Zila Parishads shall be held on
such date, as the State Election Commission in consultation with the Govt. may appoint in
this behalf;

Provided that -

(i) in the case of re -constitution of Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad on
account of the expiry of their duration of five years, such date shall not be earlier than four
months or later than fifteen days before the expiry of duration;

(ii) in case of re -constitution of a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti on Zila Parishad on
account of dissolution of a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, as the case
may be, where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat, Pan chayat
Samiti or Zila Parishad would have continued, is six months or more than six months, such
date shall not be later than two months, after the date of dissolution of the Gram Panchayat,
Panchayat Samiti and Zila Parishad.

(2) such election shall be conducted in the prescribed manner.

(3) The Superintendence, direction and control of the conduct of such election shall be
vested in the State Election Commission.

(4) After the declaration of general election results, the names of elected Pa nches,
Sarpanches, Members, Chairmen, Vice -Chairmen, Presidents and Vive -Presidents shall be
published in the Office Gezette by the State Election Commission not earlier than one week
before the expiry of the duration of the existing Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti and
Zila Parishad:

Provided that notification regarding all other election results shall be published in the Official
Gazette by the State Election Commission forthwith.

PROVISIONS RELATING TO ELECTION

162. Electoral division: - Every sabha Area, block and district shall be divided into wards
as referred in sections 8 (3), 58(2) and 119 (b) of this Act.

163. List of voters for every electoral division: - For every electoral division, there shall
be a list of voters which shall be prepared and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of this Act “ and rules made thereunder ” under the superintendence, direction and
control of the State Election Commission.
(inserted via Notification No.Leg.36/2018 dated 06-12-2018 )

164. Omitted via Leg.36/2018 dated 06 -12-2019

165. Omitted via Leg.36/2018 dated 06 -12-2019

166. Omitted v ia Leg.36/2018 dated 06 -12-2019
167. Name of person not to be included in the list of voters for more than one
electoral division: - No person shall be entitled to have his name included in the list of
voters for more than one electoral division of the same Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti
or Zila Parishad.

168. Name of person not to be included in the list of voters more than once: - No
person shall be entitled to have his name included in the list of voters for any electoral
division more than once.

169. Availability of Government Staff: - The Government shall make available to the
State Election Commission such staff as may be necessary for the performance of any duty
in connection with the preparation and revision of list of vote rs for electoral division and
conduct of elections in respect of that Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti and Zila Parishad,

170. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred: - No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction -

(a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any person is or is not entitled to
have his name included in a list of voters; or

(b) to question the legality of any action taken or decision given by or under he authority
of the State Election Commission in connection with the preparation, maintenance or
revision of any such list.

171. Making false declaration: - If any person makes in connection with-

(a) the preparation, revision or correction of a list of voters; or

(b) the inclusion or exclusion of any entry in or from a list of voters a statement or
declaration in writing which is false and which he either knows or believes to be false or
does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year or with a fine of one thousand rupees or with both.

172. Breach of official duty in connection with the preparation etc. of list of
voters: -

(1) If any Government servant or any other person required by or under this Act to perform
any official duty in connection with the preparation, revision or correction of a list of voters
without reasonable cause breaches such official duty, he shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees.

(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any such officer or person for a
damages in respect of any such breach as aforesaid.

(3) No court shall take cognigance of any offence punishable under sub -section(I) except
on a complaint made by order of, or under authority of the Government or the State Election
Commission.

173. Persons qualified to vote and be elected: - (1) Every person whose name is in the
list of voter shall, unless disqualified under this Act or any other law for the time being
inforce, be qualified to vote at the election of member for the electoral division to which

(2) Every person who has attained the age of twenty one years and whose name is in the
list of voters shall, unless disqualified under this Act or under any other law for t he time
being in force, be qualified to be elected from any electoral division,

(3) No person whose name is not entered in the list of voters for the villages, shall be
qualified to be elected from any electoral division thereof,

(4) Subject to any disqualificat ion of a person the list of voters shall be conclusive proof for
the purpose of determining under this section whether any person is or is not qualified to
vote, or to be elected at any elections, as the case may be.

173A. Application for certain sections of Central Act 43 of 1951 to Haryana Act 11
of 1994: - The provisions of sections 20B, 33A, 134A, 134B, 135B and 135C of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 (Central Act 43 of 1951), shall mutatis mutandis
apply to the provisions of this Act:

Provided that provisions of section 135B shall be applicable to the residents of the area.

174. Restriction on simultaneous or double membership: - (1) No person shall be a
member of Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti (Zila Parishad, Legislative Assembly and
parliament) simultaneously.

(1A) If a member of Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad is elected to the
Legislative Assembly or Parliament, he shall cease to continue as an elected member of
Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, as th e case may be, from the date he
is declared elected to be Legislative Assembly or Parliament.

(2) If any person is simultaneously chosen as a member of a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat
Samiti or Zila Parishad the person shall, within fifteen days from the date of the publication
of result, intimate to the State Election Commission the name of Gram Panchayat,
Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad , as the case may be , in which he wishes to serve and
thereupon his seat in the Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Par ishad other than
the one in which he wishes to serve, shall become vacant.

(3) Any intimation given under sub -section (2) shall be final and irrevocable.

(4) In default of intimation referred to in sub -section (2) within the aforesaid period, the
State Election Commission shall determine the seat which he shall retain and thereupon
the remaining seats from which he was chosen, shall become vacant.

175. Disqualifications: - (1) No person shall be a Sarpanch {Omitted by Haryana Act No.
of 1999) or a Panch or a Gram Panchayat or a member of a Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad or continue as such who-

(a) has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, been convicted -
(I) of an offence under the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (Act 22 of 195 5), unless a
period of five years, or such lesser period as the Government may allow in any particular
case, has elapsed since his conviction; or

(II) of any other offence and been sentenced to imprisonment for not less than six months,
unless a period of five years or such lesser period as the Government may allow in any
particular case, has elapsed since his release; or

(aa) has not been convicted, but charges have been framed in a criminal case for an
offence, punishable with imprisonment for not less than ten years; or

(b) has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind; or

(c) has been adjudicated an insolvent and has not obtained his discharge; or

(d) has been removed from any office, held by him in a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti
or Zila Parishad under any provision of this Act or in a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti
or Zila Parishad before the commencement of this Act under the Punjab Gram Panchayat
Act, 1952 and Punjab Panchayat Samiti Act, 1961 and a period of five years has not elapsed
from the date of such removal, unless he has, by an order of the Government notified in
the official Gazette been relieved from the dis -qualifications arising on account of such
removal from office; or

(e) has been disqualified from holding office under any provis ion of this Act and the period
for which he was so disqualified has not elapsed; or

(f) holds any salaried office or office of profit in any Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiiti
or Zila Parishad; or

(g) has directly or indirectly, by himself or his partner any shar e or interest in any work
done by order of the Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad; or

(h) has directly or indirectly, by himself or, his partner share or interest in any transaction
of money advanced or borrowed from any officer or servant or any Gram Panchayat; or

(i) fails to pay any arrears of any kind due by him to the Gram Panchayat, Panchayat
Samiti or Zila Parishad or any Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad
subordinate thereto or any sum recoverable from him in accordance with the Chapters and
provisions of this Act, within three months after a special notice in accordance with the
rules made in this behalf has been served upon him: or

(j) is servant of Government or a servant of any Local Authority; or

(k) has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a Foreign State or is under any
acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a Foreign State; or

(l) is disqualified under any other provision of this Act and the period for which he was so
disqualified has not elapsed; or
(m) is a tenant or lessee holding a lease under the Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or
Zila Parishad or is in arrears of rent of any lease or tenancy held under the Gram Panchayat,
Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad; or

(n) is or has been during the period of one year proceeding the date of election, in
unauthorised possession of land or other immovable properly belonging to the Gram
Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad; or

(o) being a Sarpanch ( Ommitted by ibid) or Pan ch or a member of Panchayat Samiti or a
Zila Parishad has cash in hand in excess of that permitted under the rules and does not
deposit the same alongwith interest at the rate of twenty one per centum per year in
pursuance of a general or special order of the prescribed authority within the time specified
by it; or

(p) being a Sarpanch or Panch or a Chairman, Vice -Chairman or member, President or
Vice-President or member of Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad has in his custody prescribed
records and registers and other property belonging to, or vested in, Gram Panchayat,
Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad and does not handover the same inpursuance of a general
or special order of the prescribed authority withi n the time specified in the order; or

(q) Ommitted by notification dated 26.10.2006.

(r) admits the claim against Gram Panchayat without proper authorisation in this regard;

(s) furnishes a false caste certificate at the time of filing nomination:

Provided that the disqualifications under clauses (r) and (s) shall be for a period of six
years.

(t) fails to pay any arears of any kind due to him to any Primary agriculture Cooperative
Society, District Central Cooperative Bank and District Primary Cooperative Agricultu re
Rural Development Bank; or

(u) fails to pay arears of electricity bills; or

(v) has not passed matriculation examination or its equivalent examination from any
recoganised institution / board:

Provided that in case of a woman candidate or a canidate belonging to Scheduled Caste,
the minimum qualification shall be middle pass:

Provided further that in a case of woman candidate belonging to Scheduled Caste contesting
elections for the post of Panch, the minimum qualification shall be 5th pass; or

(w) fails to submit self declaration to the effect that he has a functional toilet at his place
of residence.
Explanation (I) - A person shall not be disqualified under clause (g) for membership of a
Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad by rea son only of such person -

(a) having share in any joint stock company or a share on interest in any society registered
under any law for the time being in force which shall contract with or be employed by or
on behalf of Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad; or

(b) having a share or interest in any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the
affairs of a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad may be inserted; or

(c) holding a debenture or being otherwise concerned in any loan raised by or on behalf of
any Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad; or

(d) being professionally engaged on behalf of any Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or
Zila Parishad as a legal practitioner; or

(e) having any share or interest in any lease of immovable property in which the amount
of rent has been approved by the Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad in its
own case or in any sale or purchase of immovable property or in any agreement for such
lease, sale or purchase; or

(f) having a sh are or interest in the occassional sale to the Gram Panchayat, Panchayat
Samiti or Zila Parishad of any article in which he regularly trades or in the purchase from
the Gram Panchayat of any article, to a value in either case not exceeding in any years one
thousand rupees.

Explanation (2) - For the purpose of clause (I)

(I) a person shall not be deemed to be disqualified if he has paid the arrears or the sum
referred to in clause (i) of this sub -section prior to the day prescribed for the nomination
of candida tes.

(II) * * * * * * *

176. Determination of validity of election enquiry by judge and proceedure: - (I) If
the validity of any election of a member of a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad or(ommitted by ibid ) Sarpanch of Gram Panchayat, Chairman or Vice -Chairman,
President or Vice -President of Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad respectively is brought in
question by any person contesting the election or by any person qualified to vote at the
election to which such quest ion related, such person may at any time within thirty days
after the date of declaration of results of the election present an elecion petition to the civil
court having ordinary jurisdiction in the area within the election has been or should have
been held, for the determination of such question.

(2) A petitioner shall not join as respondent to his election petition except the following
persons: -

(a) where the petitioner in addition to challenging the validity or the election of all or any
of the returned candidates claims a further relief that he himself or any other candidate
has been duly elected, all the contesting candidates other than the petitioner and where no
such further relief is claimed, all the returned candidates; -

(b) any other candidate against whom allegations of any corrupt practices are made in the
election petition.

(3) All election petitions received under the sub -section (1) in which the validity of the
election of members to represent the same electoral division is in question, shall be heard
by the same civil court.

(4) (a)If on holding of such inquiry the Civil Court finds that a candidate has, for the
purpose of election committed a corrupt practice within the meaning of sub -section(5), he
shall set aside the election and declare the candidate disqualified for the purpose of election
and fresh election may be held

(aa) If on holding such enquiry the Civil Court finds that:

(i) on the date of his election a returned candidate was not qualified to be elected;

(ii) any nomination has been impro perly rejected; or

(iii) the result of the election, in so far as it concerned a returned candidate, has been
materially affected by improper acceptance of any nomination orby any corrupt practice
committed in the interest of the returned candidate by an agent other than his election
agent or by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any
vote which is void or by any non compliance with or violation of the provisions of the
Constitution of India or of this Act or any rules or orders made under this Act, election of
such returned candidate shall be set aside and fresh election may be held;

(b) If, in any case to which clause (a) or clause (aa) does not apply, the validity of an
election is in dispute between two or more candidates, the court shall after a scrutiny and
computation of the votes recorded in favour of each candidate, declare the candidate who
is found to have the largest number of valid votes in his favour, to have been duly elected:

Provided that after such computation, if any, equality of votes is found to exist between
any candidate and the addition of one vote will entitled any of the candidates to be declared
elected, one additional vote shall be added to the total number of valid votes found to have
been received in the favour of such candidate or candidates, as the case may be, elected
by lot drawn in the presence of the judge in such manner as he may determine.

(5) A person shall be deemed to have committed a corrupt practice:

(a) who with a view to induce a voter to give or to refrain from giving a vote in favour of
any candidate, offers or gives any money or valuable consideration, or holds out any
promise of individual profit, or holds out any threat of injury to any person; or

(b) who, with a view to induce any person to stand or not to stand or to withdraw or not
to withdraw from being a candidate at an election, offers or gives any money or valuable
consideration or holds out any promise or individual profit or holds out any threat of injury
to any person; or
(c) who hires or procures whether on payment or otherwise, any vehicle or vessel for the
conveyance of any voter (other than the person himself, the members of his family of his
agent) to and from any polling station.

Explanation1. - A corrupt practice shall be deemed to have been committed by a candida te,
if it has been committed with his knowledge and consent by a person who is acting under
the general or special authority of such candidate with reference to the election.

Explanation2. The expression “vehicle” means any vehicle used or capable of being used
for the purpose of road transport whether propelled by machanical power or otherwise and
whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise.

177. Disqualifications for continuing as members. (1) If any member of a Gram
Panchayat, Panchayat Samitis or Zila Parishad -

(a) who is elected, as such, was subject to any of the disqualifications
mentioned in section 175, at the time of his election;
b) during the term for which he has been elected, incurs any of the
disqua lifications mentioned in section 175.

Shall be disqualified from continuing to be a member, and his office shall become vacant.

(2) In every case, the question whether a vacancy has arisen shall be decided by the
Director. The Director may give its decis ion either on an application made to it by any
person, or on its own motion. Untill the Director decided that the vacancy, has arisen, the
members shall not be disqualified under sub -section (I) from continuing to be a member.
Any person aggrieved by the d ecision of the Director may, within a period of fifteen days
from the date of such decision, appeal to the Government and the orders passed by
Government in such appeal shall be final.

Provided no order shall be passed under this sub -section by the Direct or against any
member without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

178. Fresh election if election is invalid: - If the election of any member is set aside
under section 176 or his office becomes vacant under section 177, a fresh election for the
vacancy so caused shall as soon as, may be held in accordance with the provisions of this
Act.

179. Power of the State Election Commission to require services of Government
staff for election: - The Government shall make available to the State Election Commission
such members of its staff as necessary as commission may require for the performance of
any duties in connection with an election and every such member shall carry our such
directions as may be issued to him by such Commission or any officer authorised by it in
relation to such election.

180. Prohibition of convassing in or near polling station: - (1) No person shall, on the
dates on which a poll is to be held in any polling station, commit any of the following acts
within the polling station, or in any public or private place within a distance of one hundred
metres of the polling station, namely: -

(a) convassing for votes;

(b) soliciting the vote of any voter;

(c) persuading any voter not to vote at the election;

(d) persuading any voter not to vote for any particular candidate;

(e) exhibiting any notice or sign (other than an office notice) relating to the election.

(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section (1) shall, on conviction, be
punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees

(3) An offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable

181. Penalty for disorderly conduct in or near Polling Station: - (1) No person shall,
on the date or dates on which a poll is held at a ny polling station -

(a) use or operate, within or at the entrance of the polling station or in any public or private
place in the neighbourhood thereof, any apparatus for amplifying or reproducing the human
voice, such as a megaphone or a loud speaker; or

(b) shout; or otherwise act in a disorderly manner, within or at the entrance of the polling
station or in any public or private place in the neighbourhood thereof, so as to cause
annoyance to any person visiting the polling station for the poll, or so as to i nterfere with
the work of the officers and other persons on duty at the polling station.

(2) Any person who contravenes of wilfully aids or abets the contravention of, the provisions
of sub -section (1) shall, on the conviction, be punished with find which may extend to one
thousand rupees.

(3) If the presiding officer a polling station has reasons to believe that any person is
committing or has committed an offence punishable under this section, he may direct any
police officer to arrest such person any thereupon the police officer shall arrest him.

(4) Any police officer may take such steps and use such force as may be reasonably
necessary for preventing any contravention of the provisions of sub -section (1) and may
seize any apparatus used for such contravention.

182. Penalty for misconduct at Polling Station. (1) any person who, during the hours
fixed for the poll at polling stations, misconducts himself or fails to obey the lawful directions
of the presiding officer may be removed from the polling station by the presiding officer or
by any police officer on duty or by any persons authorised in this behalf by such presiding
(2) The powers conferred by sub -section (1) shall not be exercised so as to prevent any
voter who is otherwise entitled to vote at a pollin g station for having any opportunity of
voting at that station.

(3) If any person who has been so removed from the polling station, re -enters the polling
station without the permission of the presiding officer, he shall, on conviction be punished
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

(4) An offence punishable under sub -section (3) shall be cognizable.

183. Maintenance of secrecy of voting: - (1) Where an election is held, every officer,
official, agent or other person who performs any duty in connection with recording or
counting of votes shall maintain and aid in maintaining the secrecy of the voting and shall
not (except for some purpose authorised by or under any law) communicate to any person
any information calculated to violate such secrecy.

(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section (1) shall, on conviction, be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine of
five hundred rupees or with both.

184. Officer etc. at election not to act for candidat es or influence voting: - (1) No
person who is a returning officer, or a presiding or polling officer at an election or an officer
or official appointed by the State Election Commission to perform any duty in connection
with an election, shall in the conduct of election do any act (other than the giving of his
vote) for the furtherance of the prospects of the elections of a candidate.

(2) No such person as aforesaid, and no number of a police force , shall endeavour -

(a) to persuade any person to give his vote at an election; or

(b) to dissuade any person from giving his vote at an election; or

(c) to influence the voting or any person at an election in any manner.

(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) shall,
on convicti on, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months
or with fine of one thousand rupees or with both.

185. Breach of official duty in connection with election: - (1) If any person to whom
this section applies without reasonable cause is guilty of any act or ommission in breach of
his official duty, he shall, on conviction be punished with fine which may extend to two
thousand rupees.

(2) The person to whom this section applied are the returning officers, presiding officers,
polling officers and any other person appointed to perform any duty in connection with the
maintenance of the list of voters, the receipt of nominations or withdrawal of candidatures
or the recording or counting of votes at an election; and at the expression “official duty”shall
for the purposes of this section be construed accordingly but shall not include duties
imposed otherwise than or by under this Act.
186. Removal of ballot paper from polling station to be offence: - (1) Any person, who at
any election fraudulently takes or attempts to take a ballot paper out of a polling station or
wilfully aids or abets the doing of any such act, shall on conviction, be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend
to five hundred rupees or with both.

(2) If the presiding officer of a polling station has reason to believe that any person is
committing or has committed an offence punishable under sub -section (1), such officer
may, before such person leaves the polling station, arrest or direct a police officer to arrest
such person and may search such person or cause him to be searched by a police officer:

Provided that when it is necessary to cause a woman to be searched, the sear ch shall be
made by another woman it stricts regard to decency.

(3) Any ballot paper found upon the person arrested on search shall be handed over for
safe custody to a police officer by the presiding officer or when the search is made by a
police officer, sh all be kept by such officer in safe custody.

187. Other offences and penalities therefore: - (1) A person shall be guilty of an
offence, if, at any election he-

(a) fraudulently defaces or destroys any nomination paper: or

(b) fraudulently defaces, destroys or removes any lists, notice or other document affixed
by or under the authority of a returning officer; or

(c) fraudulently defaces or destroys any ballot paper or the official mark at any ballot
paper; or

(d) without due authority supplied any ballot paper to any person: or

(e) fraudulently puts into any ballot box anything other than the ballot paper which he is
not authorised by law to be put in; or

(f) without due authority destroys, takes, opens or otherwise interferes with any ballot box
or ballot papers then in us e for the purpose of he election; or

(g) fraudulently or without the authority, as the case may be attempts to do any of the
forgoing acts or wilfully aids or abets the doing of such acts; or

(h) makes false declaration or submits false contents in the affidavit or conceals any
information, as the case may be, at the time of filing nomination.

(2) Any person guilty of an offence under this section shall-

(a) If he is returning Officer or a presiding officer a t a polling station or any other officer
or official employed on official duty in connection with the election, on conviction, be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine of
rupees one thousand or with both;
(b) If he is any other person, on conviction be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months or with fine of five hundred rupees or with both.

(3) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be on official duty if his
duty is to take part in the conduct of an election or part of an election including the counting
of votes or to be responsible after an election for the used ballot papers and other
documents in connection with such election, but the expression “official duty ” shall not
include any duty imposed otherwise than by or under this Act.

(4) An offence punishable under clause (b) of sub -section (2) shall be cognizable.

188. Prosecutions of certain offences: - No court shall take cognizance of an offence
punishable under section 184 or under section 185 or under clause (b) of sub -section (2)
of Section 187 except on a complaint made by an order of, or under authority from the
State Election Commission.

MISCELL ANEOUS

211. Power to Government to hold general election: - (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act or the rules make thereunder, the Government shall by notification
direct that by such date as may be specified by the State Election Commission, a general
election of panches, Sarpanches of Gram Panchayat s and members of all Panchayats
Samitis and Zila Parishads shall be held and made in the State of Haryana.

(2) As soon as a notification is issued under sub -section (1), the State Election
Commissioner and all other authorities concerned, shall take neces sary steps for such
election under and in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder.

212. Constitution of State Election Commission: - (1) The Government shall constitute
a State Election Commission for the superintendence, direct ion and control of the
preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of all elections to the elections to the
Gram Panchayats, Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads in the State.

(2) The Governor shall appoint a person as State Election Commissioner on the terms and
conditions as may be determined by Government.

Provided that the State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his officer except
in like manner and on the like grounds as a judge of a High Court and the conditions of
service of the State Election Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his
appointment.

(3) The Government shall when so requested by the State Election Commission make a
available to the State Election Commission such staff as may be necessary for the discharge
of the functions conferred on the State Election Commission by sub -section (1).

213. Constitution of Finance Commission: - (1) The Government with the prior
approval of the Governor, shall as soon as may be within one year from the commencement
of the Constitution (73rd Amendment) Act, 1992, and thereafter at the expiration of every
fifth year, constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial position of the Gram
Panchayats, Panchayats, Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads and to make
recommendations to the Government as to-

(a) the principles which should govern -

(I) the distribution between the State and the Zila Parishads, Panchayat Samitis and Gram
Panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the
Government, which ,may be divided between them under this Act and the allocation
between the Zila Parishads, Panchayat Samiti and Gram Panchayats at all levels of their
respective shares of such proceeds

(II) the determination of the taxes, duties, tol ls and fees which may be assigned to or
appropriated by the Panchayats;

(III) the grants -in-aid to the Zila Parishad, Panchayat Samiti and Gram Panchayats from
the consolidated Fund of the State;

(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the Gra m Panchayats,
Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads;

(c) any other matter referred by the Governor in the interest of sound finance of the Gram
Panchayats, Panchayats Samitis and Zila Parishads.

(2) The Finance Commission shall consist of one or more members of w hom one shall be
the Chairman.

(3) The Chairman or members of the Finance Commission shall possess such qualification
and shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed.

(4) The Finance Commission shall determine its procedure.

(5) The Chairman or a members of the Finance Commission may resign his office by writing
under his hand and addressed to the Governor but he shall continue in office untill his
resignation is accepted by the Governor.

(6) The casual vacancy created by the resignation of the Chairman or a member under sub-
section (5) or for any other reason may be filled up by fresh appointment and the remaining
period for which the Chairman or the member in whose place he was appointed would have
held office.

(7) The Finance Commission shall have the following powers in the performance of its
functions, namely: -

(a) to call for any record from any officer or authority;

(b) to summon any persons to give evidence or produce any record; and

(c) such other powers as may be assigned to it by the Governor;
(8) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the

Financial Commission under this section, together with an explanatory memorandum as to
the action taken thereon to be laid before the State Legislature.

214. District Planning Committee: - District Plan ning Committee constituted under the
Haryana Municipal Act, 1973, shall consolidate the plans prepared by the Gram Panchayats,
Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads and also prepare a draft development plan for the
district as a whole as per the provisions of article 243ZD of the Constitution of India.